1
In God’s Mountains


I was born in a small town in Tennessee—the name Sewanee, so called The University of the South. It was in 1893. My father was a white man. My mother was so called a Negress. So I was looked on as a half white bastard and so called that by almost everyone that knew me.

In this town many of the better class of white people often taken Negro boys and girls into their homes to train them to be effecient help. This is how my mother became a victim of this misfortune by producing me when she was seventeen. She descovered she was pregnet. Her mistress sent her away for me to be born.

After this event, my mother was taken in by another family, by the name of Dr. Richerson, who lived on the next estate to my fathers people. I have never known jest why this kind couple should have been so thoutful to Mother. They treated her as if she was one of the family. When I was two years old my mother married. Then she brought me to live on the estate with her and her husband.

I was about three years old before I can remember things that went on about me. My stepfather was a fine man. He was so good to me although I became to know that he was not my father at four years old—Christmas 1897.

Usally my mother taken me up to Mother Richeson to work every day. There I would play all over the house. Mother Richeson was very fond of me. She done lots of hand work. When I would do things wrong, she would say: I drop a stitch. Find it. There I would crawl over the floor, hunting for the stitch, while both mothers would laugh.

This Xmas there was to be company for dinner, so my mother thought I would be in the way of the guests. So she explained this to me. Santa Claus had brought me some fire works and toys. I was most happy. She ask me to stay in the servent quarters until after dinner. And dont touch the fire works. She dressed me in a little plaid dress, and told me to stay in the house. It was bitter cold outside, snow on the ground. The drum stove was red hot when she left for work. She came back every hour to see how I was.

The stove was red from heat. Holding a Roman candle in my hand playing with it I let it touch the stove, and it lighted and started to sparkle. I tried to put it out. It set my dress afire. I ran to the door and threw the candle out. I was on fire. Not knowing what to do I leapt in the bed and covered it. This put the fire out. Later I got up and changed dresses and bid my burned dress in my box where I kept my clothes.

Soon my mother came with my dinner like most all the cooks down South feed their children from their jobs. This is called toten. She had some toys and a lot of nickels that Mother Richerson and the guests had sent me. While she was placing my dinner on my littel table she smelled the burnt cloth. Then she ask me what happen. She wanted to know if I had shot any of my fireworks. I told her no. Soon she found I had lied. This was the first time I had ever remembered of being whipt by her.

When she stopt whipping me I ran out in the snow screaming so loud that my mother had to try to run me down to get me back in the house. Before she could reach me I had crawled through the bars of the big gate to the adjoyning estate that belong to my fathers people. There I stood screaming. My mother stood coaxing me to come back to her. She didnt wish to come through gate.

Some one spoke from the back of me, asking my mother what was she whipping me for. Mother replied: He lied to me and I spanked him and he ran away from me over there. So this white lady taken me by my hand and led me to the gate and told my mother to take me in the house and come to the gate. She had something for me at the house. So Mother taken me in and told me to stay untill she came back. She went out.

Soon she was back with lots of oranges and candy and toys. She told me: These were sent to you. I ask her: Who was the lady? She looked at me for a moment and said: You might as well know now. That was your grandmother of your white family. She said for you to be a good boy and dont tell storys to any one.

This made me very happy to think some else loved me, too. No farther did I think of it. Later my stepfarther came. He helpt me shoot my fireworks. I was so fond of him.

I didnt have any children to play with. I had my mother and stepfather. They were like two pals. We didnt have any company, except my fathers friends that worked on the construction. When it rained the men often came to the house to play checkers, in which my stepfather was a good player. No one had anything much to say to me. I was always busy trying to build somthing, or make somthing.

My mother when she was off the job she started me on my alphebet when I was four years old. I had to count everything that came in the house—from my fathers pay envelope to the matches in boxs. Sometimes I would complain. Then she would tell me that she wanted me to be the best edjacated man in the world. When I would go to Mother Richeson house, I had to do the same thing. Mother Richeson when I was four and a half bought me a slate and started me writing. This is when she told me I had to be babtized.

She called Father Gerry to come and babtize me. The next day Father came. With him came Bishop Gailor of Tenn. and Father Clabourne. When they taken me in the parlor I became frighten and tryed to run out. My mother caught me and held on to me. They had on their cottas and gouns which I had never seen them dressed like this. Mother Richinson and Bishop Gaitor kneelt by and told me I was a child of God and I must be babtized and Bishop was my Godfarther, Mother Richeson was my Godmother, and Father Gerry and Father Eastern would be my consulman. When this was over I was most happy to know that I had so many friends. I began to love every body.

Here I wish to explain somthing about this town, as why the white people were so democratic. Most of the people at this time that lived here were English descent. There many of them were nobility respect of England. The residental area was fenced in. No poor white people lived inside of this area. Nobody lived there except the aristicrats and their servants. All workers like house maids, butlers, coachman were all colored and most everyone was called colored. You rarely ever heard the words ever used—Negro or nigger. It seemed that everybody was happy just to be there.

When I was five years old my little brother was born, in which I became jelouis of imeditately. It seemed everything changed. Every way. People came to our house to see my little brother. Everyone colored was so fond of him. Until this happend there were so few women ever come to see my mother. There were but few ever had anything to say to me. They would just look at me as if I could not have been.

My white family was named Doane. Some of the women would say to the other: He sure is a Doane. He is just like them. By the time I was six year old I had become to understand that I just wasnt like the rest of my family. I know my mother had become to notice my feeling, though she did not say anything to me concerning this. They gave me more priviledges. I was allowed to go out in the park and play with the white children when their nurses brought them in the park to play. Many times the mothers would come with their children. They were all so kind to me.

You see the town was so small that the streets didnt have any names. No houses had any numbers. Everybody knew everybody, black or white. The white people had everything under such control. They knew everything, so that was why it seemed that everyone knew me and was so kind to me. So often they would bring icecrem, cookies. I would be sirved with their children. This went on for about six months.

Then my mother told me that school was opening out of the corporation and I should go. This was where most of the colored people and the poor class of white lived. So the first day she taken me to school so I would know the way. I met the teacher and I was enrolled. For two weeks, I went to school. I did not like school, because the children didnt like me. I was the only real light complected one in the school. The rumer soon was out that I was a bastard and that my white uncle was a nit witt who was called Clabber. Soon all the children joked fun at me of this name, which vexed me very much. My teacher was very kind to me untill I started to fight the kids when they would tease me. I was graded, placed in the second reader.

Just as I was beginning to become adjusted my mother taken sick. She wanted me to stay with her. She had been ailing every since my brother was born. She never went back to work. So I was glad not to go to school. My mother was aflected with consumption. She know she would never be well. This four months before she got too weak she kept me with her almost every minute.

She would take my brother and me and go up on the main streets when the military students would march by. I thought that was the greatest somthing that could be: To be a cadet. She talked so much about this training. Sundy morning the cadets would march by music by their band like the West Point cadets. So on Sundy mornings I would go up on the street where they marched by. From where I would meet them it was just two blocks from St. Agustus Chapel to which they had to march. So I would try to keep up with them untill they got to the chapel. When they arrived at the chapel, they would form a formation, pass in reveiw and salute their superiors. I would stand somewhere and salute too. Then march in the chapel.

Everybody always waited for the arival of the cadets before going in the chapel. When they marched in I wouldnt go in the chapel. I would go to the back of the chapel to watch the organ pumper pump the pipe organ. I would watch him for a while. Then I would go to my mother.

After a few Sundays I was spoken to by many white people. All white people down South seems to love colored children. So one morning there was a package left on our doorstep. I brought it in and gave it to my mother. She open it. There was a little coat and cap somthing like the cadets. So Sundy mornings I was always waiting for cadets to pass. Seem everybody would laugh. When I pass by they would salute me when I salute them. I do beleaive that was the happiest days of all my life. On Sundays my stepfather would be home with my mother. That was why I could go away for a while. I would come in and tell her how wonderful things were.

Very soon my mother became so sick that I could not wait on her. Father had to get some one who was a woman to care for her. I had my little brother then to look after. Father built another room on to the one we had been living in where we cooked, slept and bathed in. Father Gerry, pastor of St. Agustus, came every morning. He and Dr. Hall. Father would pray, and before he would leave he would talk to me telling me to stay close to her. Many of the white families would drive up in carrages bringing somthing for her. They were so genorous in every way.

So one morning Farther ask me would I like to go home with him. I went. He only lived a block from us. This was the first time I had gone to anyones home. We went in. He had three children Alexander, Annie, Sumner, his wife, whom we called Mother. She often taught neighborn children like a kindergarten. So almost every day except Sunday, I would go with Father home to play with the children at recess. Sometimes I stayed all night because I was in the way at home, and Mother Gerry was just about the sweetest lady I ever knew. She was so kind. I did not attend class although she explain anything I ask her and treated me like other children. This also made me very happy.

Just here is the first time I had to learn something about religions. I hadnt ever seen my mother go to church nor my step father. So one morning before Father Gerry came mother ask me not to go over to the Gerry home. She said that Elder Trouble was coming, and I might be needed. So when he arrived with him was four women. They came in. I took my little brother outside to play. They sang and prayed for many hours. All at once there was a scream. Which I knew it was my mothers voice. I rushed in the house. There my mother was sitting up in bed clapping hands, saying: Glory Hallalula. I been born again. I rushed to her as she said: My son, I am now happy. I didnt know what it all ment.

As I looked at all six people with tears streaming down their faces, Mother held out her hands, saying: Bring my two sons to me. I turned around to get my brother who was crawling in the door. I carried him to the bed. One of the sisters put him in the bed, and I climbed in. Mother as feeble as she was pulled us both against her breast and folded back on her pillar, saying: God bless them. I can now die happy. As she ran her feeble fingers through the curls of my hair, saying over and over: He leadeth me through green pastures and lie me down by still waters. I will not fear to enter the vally of death. I will not be alone. Soon she was in a coma.

I was going over to Father Gerry. I was told that Mother had confessed religion. When I met Father Gerry I told him of this. Father took me by hand and said: Lets go to her at once. When we arrived every one of the colored people had gone. No one was there except Mother and her nurse. Father Gerry walked to her bedside. With his left hand he stroke her brow softly. The word she spoke I cant remember. Then he knelt by the bed with me and the lady nurse. There he prayed and talked with her.

Mother spoke then, asking him what should be done with Ely. I know I am going die. Eddie, he has a father to look after him. Ely as he is, you know, hasnt anyone. I now can die happy when I know that he will be cared for. Farther then spoke, saying: Lena, you know that Bishop Gaylor is Elys Godfather, and I am his conselor, and Farther Eastern. He will be taken care of. Who do you think he could live with? Mother told him to send for Matty Davis, whom she had lived with when she was a girl. Father waited untill I went for her and came back. There was agreed that Matty Davis would raise me. My mother was very happy. Father Gerry told Mother Matty that she would have help if she needed it.

This was the begining of a new life for me. I left with her. That was the last time I saw my mother alive. She died the next day. My brother and his father moved out of the corporation to where most of the colored people lived. Soon he married again.

My foster mother cooked for Dr. Barton. They let her keep me on the estate. They were very kind to me. I was then allowed to go almost anywhere I wanted to go. I would go to Father Gerrys house every day to play with the children. Mother Mat had three children, one girl, two boys. Her children were grown. She owned a house where they lived. Neither of them were married. I soon became to love her and daughter as if they were my own.

When I was eight years old Mama Matty decided I should go to school. So we stop staying at night in the corporation. She would go home. School did not open as was expected. So I would go to and frow with her to work and to play with the white children.

I often would go to the building where my stepfather worked to see him. I loved him. He loved me too. I knew. He was so kind. Everybody that knew him loved him, white or black. He was so strong I just loved to be close to him. He was said to be the strongest man in the county. It was often he would display his strenth by lifting, to amuse the students who liked to watch him. His job mostly was to wind the derick for the stone setters.

Just as I was turning nine this was where things began to change for me and happiness faded. All this time my friendships had broadend to where almost every notable in town knew me. Many of them would stop on the street and would talk to me. I was taught by Mother to be curtious to every one. People liked me for this, and often told me that.

I hadnt ever thought any thing about race destinction. I knew very little about colored children. The word Negro was rarely ever used, or I just didnt pay any attention to it. I had the dream that some day I would be like the students. I would be a cadet. All the white kids talked of this. We drilled and played togather happily. I didnt only go to Father Gerrys house. I would go to any ones house that had children. Have lunch. All these mothers were kind to me.

One morning I went to Mother Gerrys to play. It was cold outside. There wasn’t any children except her own around. Mother said to us: The leaves has blown over the yard. If you boys will rake them up, I will give fifteen cents each. The job was soon done. When she paid us, out to the drug store we went to buy an egg flip which was a drink like a malted milk. Alexander, Sumner and I. We went to the dispencer and ordered three drinks. I had been here before many times with these children and got drinks. Even men and women had given me drinks because I had no money. Dr. Conger the propiator never said anything.

This day there was a new disspencer that I hadnt seen before. So he made two drinks, handed one to Alexander, another one to Sumner. Didnt make any for me. I ask where was my drink. He said: You don’t get any. Alexander spoke up: Why don’t Ely get a drink? He has money to pay for it. The dispencer said: I don’t make drinks for no nigger. He is a nigger. Alexander said: He is one of us. The fellow said: I wouldnt make a drink for a nigger if I never worked. The boys both tossed their glasses over the counter and out of the store we went back home. This was the first time I ever felt hurt except when my mother died.

We were just a block from the Gerry home. We didnt talk at all on the way home. Alexander was two years older than I and was older than Sumner. I am not sure that Alexander did not have more understanding about this than we did. When we entered the house Alexander and Sumner went strait to their room. I walked to the libarry where Mother Gerry and Annie was sitting by the grate fire. Mother Gerry looked up at me and said: Did you boys have a nice drink? I said: No, I didnt have a drink. The clerk wouldn’t make me a drink. He called me a niggir and said he did not make drinks for niggirs.

Mother stop looking at me and looked toward the fire. I stood there for a moment. Then I ask her: Mother, what is a nigger? She did not answer. She walked to the hall and called the two boys to come to the libiary. They came. She said: I have some cookies and will make some hot chocolate. You dont have to go to the drug store. No one said anything.

She went to the kitchen. I followed her. While she was heating the milk I could see that she was a bit purturbed. Then I ask her would she please tell me what is a nigger. Why should I be called a nigger? It must be very bad to be a nigger. She stood with her back to me fully a minute before she spoke. She turned and faced me. She said: Ely, I think this is a job for Father. You go to him. He can explain this better than I can. He is over at St. Agustus. For three years I had been coming to her for understanding. This was the first time she refused to explain to me. I did not wait for choclate. I went over to St. Agustus.

Father Gerry was in his study. He was writing. He looked up and said: Ely, my boy, what brings you here? I said: Father, there is something I want to ask you if you have time. He said: Have a seat there. Ill talk to you in a minute. I waited. Soon he said: I am preparing this for class and lecture this afternoon. Now what is it you want to know, Ely? I stood up. Then I said: Father I want to know what is a nigger. I was called that by the clerk over at the drugstore. He would not take my money. Mother Gerry said I should come to you for explanation.

He started to say something and stopted, just for a moment. Then he said: Ely, I am very busy. I have this lecture to do so I will send you to Father Eastern. Tell him I sent you and he will explain to you what you need to know. If you dont find him at home come back tomorrow and I will talk to you. I thanked him and left.

This was the first time I had visited Father Eastern at home. He often talked to me when he would meet me on the street. He was very fond of children. He was older than any of the fathers. He look after much of the charity program. I did not feel as close to him as I did to Father Gerry. I wasnt sure that he would take time to talk to me like Father Gerry. I had to go five blocks to his house. I went into the yard. There were many pigeons on the lawn feeding on food he had thrown out to them.

He called to me, saying: Ely, my boy, you come to see me. The way he spoke so kindly I lost my fear or doubt of him. I was sure he would talk to me. He was standing in the doorway. He said: Come in the house where it is warm. He went in his library. Then he ask how my foster mother was. I didnt care to talk as usually.

Then I said: Father, I was sent here by Father Gerry for you to tell me what a nigger is and why should I have to be called a nigger. He walked over to the window and stood there looking out on the lawn. I spoke again, saying: Father, have I done somthing wrong? He turned to me and said: I want to think a bit. No, Ely, you havent done any wrong. Although I could see that he was awed a bit. He still had his robe on. He had never been married. He lived alone. He was a man in his sixtys. Several minutes passed before he spoke again as he was laying his robe over the back of a chair. He said: Ely, just you and I take a walk down to the brook, which was back of the house.

He put on his coat and hat, taken his cane and went out to walk. He spoke about the birds enjoying their food. We had walked a hundred yards. He hadn’t spoke a word. Then he started to talk of how beautiful the autumn was. The trees were beautiful. He continoued to talk of nature. By this time it seemed as if I was closer to him than anyone else, because no one of the white people had ever talked to me this long at one time. All fear had left me.

I ask him again: Farther, are you going to tell me what a nigger is? He said: What happened to you that you are so confused over the word? I explained that I was called this name and was refused to be sold a drink at the drugstore. The clerk served the other children, and said he would not make a drink for a nigger, never. The other boys told him that I was one of them. He would not listen to them. He said a nigger had no right to drink where white people drink.

Then Father said: Lets sit here on this rock. So we sat down. He said: Ely, this has perturbed you very much, I know. I can see that. And it may take some time for you to understand the full meaning of this word. But first I must correct that word nigger. The word is Negro. Why it is trying for you is because you have been raised up here within about ten blocks. Here in the corporation you are treated like all other children. You go to any home where there are children and you are accepted. Now dont let this burden you too much. You will see that it wont make any difference to people that love you. Then he said: You must come and talk to me more often. You know I am suposed to look after you. I was apointed by Bishop Gailor who is your Godfather as one of your consellors. You can come to me any time.

I said to him: Father, I still dont know what a nigger really is. By this time we were back to the house. He looked up at the sky, then said: You had better be going to your Mama Mat, as he called her. It is getting late for you. Come back tomorrow after lunch and we will talk again and forget about the clerk because he should not have talked to you that way. I said goodbye and started to Dr. Bartons house where my foster mother cooked. On the way home I met many white ladys that I knew. Every one spoke to me, saying: Hello, Ely, just as they had always done.

Soon I was in the kitchen with my mother. She was ready to serve dinner. She always fed me when she served the white people because she rarely ever ate dinner on the job. It was customary for the cooks to take what was left home with them. So this is called pan totten. I didnt tell my mother anything about what had happened that day. She was not much for talking, she beleiving in children being seen and not heard.

On the way home, my mother said to me: Why are you so quiet tonight? I had always been singing or jabbering away or asking questions which she seldom answered. When we got home there was company. I went upstairs to bed. I could not go to sleep for a long time thinking about me having to be a nigger. What could a nigger be and why should God make a nigger? I knew there were more to it than Farther Easton told me. I would learn more tomorrow when I go back to talk to Father.

The next morning it was raining and cold. Mama Mat and I went to work as usally. We were soaked by the time we walked this half mile. I had to stay in the house all that day, sitting there, watching my mother make beaten biscuit at which she was somewhat an artist, beeting the dough with a laundry iron. She let me beet some too. Helping her gave my mind a lift. At two oclock was her rest period. All the cooks was at liberty until five oclock, when they would go back to work to prepare dinner. They would often visit one another.

This day several maids came to visit my mother. There had been a lynching in Chattanooga. The victim was a Negro by the name of Ed Johnson. These maids were very much in destress over it. This was the first time I had been around when they were talking anything of racial terms. This was the first time I had heard anyone talk about how badly the Negro could be treated. One of these maids I called Aunt Lula Gray. She was telling them about how loyal the Negro is to white. Even a Negro knocked down the white man that shot and killed President McKinerly. They conversed their whole period of rest. I sat there listening to their conversation and whims.

That night Mama Mat and I stayed on the estate. It was raining. The next morning the sun came out bright. I could go out to play with the children if I so wished, though I had decided I would not go back to Father Gerrys to play for a while or at all. There was somthing that wasnt just right in my feeling. The cochman was polishing the carage when I heard the yells of the children playing at Father Gerrys home. This was recess. Soon I found I was on my way there. I had almost forgoten about what had happened previous at the drug store.

When I reached his home there were many children there playing football. I was one of the players on one side of the teams and much favored before this day. Just as I started to walk on the lawn someone kicked the ball. It landed just in front of me. I picked it up, intended to kick it, when a boy name Randolph snatched the ball from me and said: This ball belong to me, and I did not buy this ball for a nigger to kick. It seemed that every boy there turned his back to me except Alexander, Fathers oldest son. He looked so unhappy. Soon they all forgot I was there.

To me I began to think how things had changed in just two days after this clerk had named me a nigger. I turned and went back to where my mother worked. I was hurt worse by this than ever before. All I think of was how could God make a nigger and why. Now I could cry a bit. I went strait to the stable where Frank the cochman was cleaning out the stables. I tried to talk to him. He only looked at me like all other Negros would when I would ask what was a nigger. It seemed to me there was an answer somewhere. I could not give up trying. All at once I thought of Father Eastern. He had told me to come to him any time I wish to talk to him. This is what I will do. Go to him. He was undestanding.

When I arrived at his home he was just returning from his walk after lunch. We both met at his gate. He spoke to me so kindly and invited me in the house. I followed him inside. He often hummed a bit. I sat on the leather couch. He pulled off his coat, hung them in the closet, then put on his robe. Over ten minutes passed. He was still humming very low. I sat there waiting for him to say somthing. I waited a few minutes. Then I spoke, saying: Father, please tell me why there should be Negros?

He was looking at some papers on his desk. He drop the papers on the desk, and turned to me and said: Are you still confused over that word? I answered: Yes, sir. He said: Dont be. He spoke this like it was a command. I stood up, tried to talk, then I bursted out crying, asking him: Please tell me why our God would make anybody a nigger when no one liked them. I had put my face in my hands bending down on the couch crying. I felt his soft fat hands resting on my head. He was saying somthing.

The first I understand him to say was: They are all Gods children. He sat down on the couch, still patting my head. He ask me to sit up. Then he said: Ely, I didnt think this meant so much to you. You are so young to feel like this. What has happened? I tried to talk. I began to tell him about what happened when I went to play with the children this morning. How Randolph refused to let me kick his football, and other boys did not want to play with me. He called me a nigger. Father, we have been playing togather for two years. Since that clerk called me a nigger everyone else now thinks I am no good. What will I do? I ask him why did people burn Negros like they do. He ask who had burned anyone. I told him of what I had heard the maids talking yesterday about the lynching in Chattanooga.

Then he said: Dont talk of this any more. Dont burden yourself with things you hear like that. I have been much concerned about you since you came to see me. Ely, you are more advanced than I had given you credit to be. This aproach caught me much unaware the other day. So now I will explain to you why there are Negros. Then you will see that it is not at all bad to be called a Negro.

He started to talk by saying: Your race which is called Negro was brought to the United States from Africa as slaves to serve the econamy purpose of the white people. They were given the name Negro, which repersents the word negroid of Latin meaning black. They are the desendant of a tribe in Africa named Negri on the Negri river. This happened over a hundred years ago. At that time, tyrant law was legitimate almost around the world. These men and women was sold at auction just like anything of material would be sold for individual purpose or serve their cause. Tyrant means ownership of man as property.

He said: I was talking to your Grandfather Ned who is the scavenger for the city. He was doing some work here for me yesterday. I had quite a talk with him. He was born in slavery, was sold on the block. Most of his family was sold like he was. He said some of his people has never been located yet. The Goverment freed your people by a revolution which was the so called Civil War, which freed the slaves. So called the emancipation of the United States. The black people maintained the name Negro. In the Southern states mostly there is a discrimanation that suports a segregation which is very much a law that suports this phraise: Anyone that has Negro blood in them is a Negro. It dont matter how white they are. They just dont have the priviledges that the white race has, especiality in the South. Their priviledges are limited even in law. Although it may seem very unjust the way our laws are exercised, all of this supports our economy, which means our program of living. White people and colored love each other. All people serve each other because we are all Gods people. Our religion teaches man is born equal. Black people in the sight of God are the same.

Now do you feel better? Now I am going to make some sugestion for you that I think will help you. First, I want to say this. Dont become bitter toward the white children because of what has happened today. You know you are liked by everybody here. You grew up among the people here in just about ten blocks. Youre just like any other child in Sewanee to most people. This word Negro should have not come to you the way it came. That is why it is so hard for you to understand. I don’t think you have had any association with colored children. So I think it would be best if you would go out of the corporation where they live and play with them some. This I think will help you in many ways. You will see they are very happy and lovable people, and there is nothing bad about being a Negro.

Then he said: Is there anything you don’t understand now? If so, ask me. By this time I had stop crying and was listening to every word he was saying, although there were many things going over in my mind back to my mother by birth. Things she had told me what she wanted me to be. As young as I were it seemed to me a Negro was just wortheless. What could he be? Still a slave? There was one thing on my mind I just could not get off, and that was the military accadimey. When Father ask me was there any questions, I spoke for the first time, saying: Father, will I go to the military accadimy when I grow up? He place his hand on my sholder and said: No, Ely, colored people dont go to school with white people in the South. This to me was about the hardest blow that I could experience, because this was the greatest dream of all the boys I had known. For four years this had been my dream, that some day I would be a cadet. It seemed that everything of hope just floated out of me and I was just a shell.

Time had passed so fast I did not realize it. Father said: It is time for tea. It is five oclock. You had better be going before it is dark. He said: Now, Ely, you can come to me any time you want to talk to me. Since you do understand better now I want to see that smile on your face again that has made every one love you. Because you have been the most happy little fellow I have known and love everybody. Now your job is making everybody love you. Now come to see me more often.

I picked my cap up off the floor and walked to the door. Just then I realized that I felt so close to Father. It seemed that he was helping me so much in so many ways I had found a friend differint than any one except my mother by birth. I bade him goodbye and started home. I had overstayed my time. The streets were clear of everybody as always was at dinner time. I ran most of this ten blocks.

When I got to Dr. Bartons my foster mother was serving dinner. She gave me a scolding, and ask where had I been. I told her to Farther Easterns house to talk to him. Then she said: If you dont stop annoying people about being a Negro, I will whip the life out you. She said Frank had told her that I had been crying around the stable that day and asking him what was a nigger. Stop asking people questions especially like that and if I hear of you doing it again I am going to whip you. We are all nigger and there is nothing wrong about it.

Then it seemed everything was all anew again. I refused to eat. Then I tried to tell her what had happened that day. She didnt seem to care, only said she didnt want to hear about it. By this time I was weeping. She was hurrying to get through with the dishes. I was drying them when Mrs. Barton came out and congratulated her on the dinner.

She saw that I was crying. She was the most kind lady. She aske me what was I crying about. Mother spoke, saying: He is just about to drive us crazey about him being Negro. He was called nigger by a clerk at the drugstore a few days ago, and he thinks it is a desgrace to be a Negro. He has been around you white people all his life. For that reason he thinks he should be white. Mrs. Barton smiled at my mother, then said: Mattie, dont be too harsh with him. Try to bear with him. It could be more than what you are thinking of. He dont know much about colored people. That clerk shouldnt have spoke as he did. Not at that time and to the children. Give him time. He will work it out for himself. She smiled and said good night.

Then Mother said: We are going home tonight. So take this pan of food to the room. I went out to the servant room. Soon she came in. While she was changing her clothes, she ask me what did Father say to me. She seem to be different a bit. I was suprised to hear her say: Ely, I love you as my own. I suppose I just dont understand you. Things will be alright. Dont worry about it. Then I told her that Father said I should play with colored children some. It would be better for me to know them. I ask if I could stay home the next day and go to play with the colored children. She said yes. We did not talk on the way home. I went to bed early.

Mother told her daughter that I was to stay with her tomorrow, and could go to play with the children in the Bottom. That was what they call the play ground.

The next morning my adopted sister talked with me, telling me how to get along with colored people. Her father was a white man, and how she was often resented by colored people. We talked all morning. I was most fond of her. She taught dancing to both white and colored. She went to homes in neiboring towns. At twelve oclock there came four white girls from the poor white side of town, which was often called the sagers. That was what the arristocrats and colored called them.

At their arrival, she sent me to the playground. When I got there the kids were playing in groups. The larger boys were playing foot ball. I found that I was in a split groupe—too young for one, too old for the other. The fifteen year to twelve played football. They would not let me play with them. The others were around seven and eight. I am ten years old.

I stood and looked at the big boys play for awhile, hoping that I might be accepted in some way. When the ball was kicked out of bounds I ran it down, and rushed back with it. One of them said: Throw it here, Clabber. He turned and said to the other boys: Thats Clabber Wicks nephew. He will never have sense enough to play football, and he thinks he is white. I walked away because I hadnt heard the word Clabber for three years, not since I stop school. They all laughed.

I walked away. Just across the playground was where the younger group around seven or eight year olds were playing. I stood watching them. They were playing a game I hadnt seen before, the game called hop scotch. I had decided to join in with them.

Up walk a big black woman with a bonnet on and snuff brush in her mouth. She spoke to two of the children, telling them to come home. She stood staring at me for two or three minutes. I spoke to her, saying: Howdy. She said: You know you are sure a bastard if there ever was one. Just at that moment came up a young girl around eighteen. Stopped by her side, then said: Who is that little boy? Hes a pretty boy. Then the big woman turned and said: Did you ever see a bastard that wasnt good looking? They are love babys. But who wants one?

They turned and walked away, and all the children follow. I stood there looking as they walked away. There were three words that I just couldnt bear to be called: bastard, clabber, nigger. I knew there was no need to talk to any one about it. Who cared? This day was the first time I realized I was an orphan, and thats all. No one really wanted me. Father had told me to love everybody. This I would try to do. I found myself wishing that God hadnt taken my mother. This last year I had wished much for her.

As I was walking back home I met my grandfather driving his slop wagon on his way home. He lived a half mile out in the forest where he had a hog ranch. These three barrels was full of swill that he colected every day from the boarding houses to feed the hogs. I hadnt see him very much since my mother died.

He stop to talk to me. Why was I not with Mother Mat? I told him Father Eastern had told me to play with the colored children. He nodded his head. I ask him could I go home with him for a while. He reached down, caught my hand and pulled me up by him and said: Now dont worry me with a lot of questions.

He drove on. I sat there silent, much disappointed because I ment to tell him some of what happened that day. I knew he didnt want to hear anything I had to say. The horses plodded along with the heavy load into the woods. Once and awhile he would mumble somthing to himself.

Soon we reached the feeding pens where he would transfer the slop to other barrels. When this was done he gave a loud hoop hog call. Almost from nowhere hogs came running, Chickens, turkey all came. He poured the slop in the gutters. The pens were full of hogs, all sizes.

I spoke for the first time, asking him how many hogs did he have. He didnt answer at once. He stood looking at them eat. I thought he had forgot my question which I would not ask again. He looked at me for a moment, then said: I dont know how many hogs I got. I just cant count them. I want you to count them for me. I was glad to hear him ask me.

I leaped off the wagon, climbed up on the board fence midway the pens and started to count. When I finished, I looked around for him. He was down on his knees in a small pen holding some chicken intestines in his hand, looking in the ground. I rushed over to the pen. He had a possum in a box fattening. I told him he had eighty seven head. He mumbled a bit, shut the lid on the possum, then stood looking at the hogs. I could see he was pleased. Then he asked how close was that to a hundred. I told him fifteen. He just grunted several times as he drove to the barn about five hundred yards away. He unhitched the horses. He seemed to be glad to have me along.

He lived alone in a two room log cabin. He had this five acre farm under cultivation, seven cows, one bull. This was the first time I had been to his house in almost three years. He accumalated much since then. We went into the house.

The fire place still had embers alive which he put on the coffee pot. He brought under his arm somthing wrapped I hadnt notice before until he opened it. It was some food from the Emma Tuckers boarding house. Miss Emma always gave any one of colored people food that was left. Grandpa was always there after the noon meal to pan tote what ever was left. This was it. Such food as Aunt Harriet could cook none such any where. This cook was Sothern, known as Aunt Harriet Smith. There were often a turn away in the summer months at meal time.

The food was soon hot in the pan—candid sweet potatoes, macarorni, squash, biscuits, fried chicken, cobler. I was hungry. Grandpa and I ate all of it. He remarked to me what a wounderful woman Mrs. Tucker was. She was such a Christian and how she loved her servants and helped them, every way she can. She asks about you every time she sees me. You must stop and see her sometime. You know she raised Lee, your stepfather, and George Price, her headwaiter who has been with her twenty years. These Swanee people are the finest in the world. They have sure been good to me.

At this I asked: Grandpa hadnt I better be going? It will soon be dark. He said: No, wait until I milk the cows. I have to deliver milk to five places, then I will drop you off at Mats house. I want you to do somthing befour you go. We were sitting on the floor in front of the fireplace, eating off the hearth which he often like to do.

He went to the kitchen, got the milk buckets and came back, set them by me, then went to the corner of the bedroom and pulled out a small trunk, placed it in front of the fire place, threw some light wood on the fire to make light, then open the trunk, lifted out some magazines. He said: While I am milking. I want you to count the money in this trunk. It is all silver. I dont like bills. I will close the door. If anyone come, shut the trunk and dont tell them of the money.

He went out. So I started to count. He finished milking, came in. I was still counting. There was separating of smaller coins and I was slowed a bit. When he finished straining the milk and botteling, I was too. He had nine hundred twenty eight dollars twenty cents, all in silver. I told him the amount. He look at the money all in ten dollar stacks. He reached out his hand and patted me on the head, saying: Your mama said you would make a smart man someday. Now we know how much is there. Dont tell anybody about it. Remember that—nobody. When I get money I always get silver and just put it in that trunk. I dont like banks and I dont want to be robbed. He picked the trunk up and put it back in the corner of the room.

It was dark now. The fire flames were flickering bright, as we stood before the fireplace. This was the first time I had seen him a bit happy. I did not ask one question. I remembered that Father Eastern told me that when he ask Grandpa why he didnt spend some time with me, he said I ask too many questions about things he didnt know the answers, and I was too much bother.

He covered the trunk with some rags and clothes. Then he had held out one book that he called his accounts. He knelt in front of the fireplace, opening the book, and began drawing milk bottles on the lines. When he finished drawing on four different pages, he said: I keep my own books. You see this is the Barnwells, the McCraddys, Tuckers, Johnson. I deliver milk every evening and morning. So I draw all bottles of milk for a week. Then I colect. When you come back again I want you to help me check up on my customers I do privey work for. They all owe me money way back. I told him I would be back and would stay some knights.

We came out of the house, closed the door that didnt have a lock at all. We hitched up the horse to the sulky he used to deliver milk in.

Somthing new for me to learn for the last two weeks with colored people was to listen to what they had to say, and ask nothing. As a child you were better liked. All white people seemed to like to be asked questions and enjoyed answering them—even the school students that I would talk to that knew me. As John his horse went winding on the trail through the woods, it was black dark now. I ask him how could the horse see his way so good and we could not. He said: They have night eyes and we dont and dont start asking questions. You have been a good boy today. You have been a lots of help to me. You will soon be old enough to milk the cows and feed the stock. Then I want you to come live with me. I am going to marry this spring. I am going to buy a rubber tire buggy like the white people have. He said: I will be rich some day and you will be just like me. Not afraid of nothing. Thats what wrong with the niggers. They are too afraid. You are my boy and you are a chip off the old block, arnt you?

I was feeling happy now for the first time, to think of being a nigger, and by all means I would be brave. Not afraid of any thing. Then I said: Grandpa, I think I will start to school soon. Then I will be so I can help you with your accounts. He answered quickly, saying: School dont mean anything to a nigger. What do they have to do except work like hell from morning till night year in and year out, and do what the white man tells them to do and it dont take no education to do that. You be like me. Make your own job. Get somthing of your own. Dont have no boss. Be your own. When we niggers come to learn that then we will be somebody.

The horse had stopped at this small brook where he liked to drink this spring water. You must learn to do for yourself. When I was a boy your age, I was a slave. I was put on the block and sold with five other brothers and sisters. My sisters I havent ever heard of since that day. I havent been inside of a schoolhouse in my life. Thats why I dont like no banks to keep my money, where I have to ask someone how much I got, and I cant write my own name so I dont write checks. Money is all a man needs. Just have it. Thats what counts. You see, son, nobody tells old Ned what to do. They aske him will he do what they want him to do. I make my own price. When they want their priveys cleaned, slop hauled, trash moved, they ask me, and what is my price? I tell them. Now you see why I got more money than any nigger in Sewanee except Marcus Handley. He owns the barber shop.

By this time we were at my foster mothers house. He said: Tell Matt, which he called her, that I kept you late. But dont tell about my money and where I keep it. Come and see me soon. We will go possum hunting next week. I said good bye. He drove away. I went into the house.

My sister Ann and her boy friend was standing before the fire. She ask where I had been. I told her. She kissed me on the forehead, and said: We looked for you everywhere. I thought you had gone to Mama at the Bartons. How did you like the kids you played with today? I told her I didnt play. I was called a bastard, and no one wanted to play with me, also the big woman said that Clabber Doane was my uncle, and I was crazy like him. I was coming home when I met Grandpa Ned, and rode home with him. I am glad I went, because he is glad he is a nigger. He told about being a slave when he was a boy, and what a man he is. No one bosses him. He has his own job, and is not afraid of anybody. Sis smiled and said: Was he drunk? I knew he often got drunk. I said: No, we had a good time. Jake, her boy friend, said to Annie: I will be going. I will be back later. He went out the door. I was glad to see him go.

I wanted to talk to Ann. She loved me and I loved her. She was the only one of the family that ever taken time to talk to me. I knew she wouldnt discuss the word Negro. Mama Matt had told her not to talk about it with me. She stood there before the fire looking so beautiful, smiling at me as if she was the happiest woman in the world. For a few minutes she stood looking at the ceiling, then said: To your cheeks, rosy little boy, you are a pretty boy. I am going to let you in on a secret. I am going to marry. Jake proposed to me this afternoon. We will ask Mama tonight to let us marry. If she comes home. Dont tell any one.

I stood looking at her. Then I screamed: No, Annie, please dont leave me. I ran to her, seizeing her around the waist, sobbing, telling her how much I love her and I know you are the only person that love me. I am called bastard by everybody. I want you to tell me what a bastard is. She held me back from her, looking down into my eyes, with blue eyes and a frown on her forehead. She said softly: Tell me who called you a bastard. I told her about the big black woman with the bonnet and how she called me a white bastard.

She then held me close to her breast and said: You poor child, as soon as you get over one hurt you find another. I am not going to leave you. When Jake and I marry we will get a house and you can live with us. Jake has a good job with Mrs. Vaness at the boarding house. He is a smart man. I still was asking: Annie, why do I have to be a bastard, and why are bastards not liked by colored people? She kissed me again on my forehead and pushed me backward into the chair and said: Sit there.

Then she started to hum the tune she knew I like: Bill Baily, wont you come? She two-stepped across the room and back again, then stood before me. Then she said: Is there any thing wrong with me? I said: No, Ann, you are beautiful. Then she said: I am called a bastard, but it dont worry me now like it use to. Negros like to hurt people. When they can, some do. They dont know any better. My father is a white man, and yours is a white man too. Thats why we are so white and look different than other Negros. We have to take many insults. Thats why Mama moved to Sewanee from Winchester. Because it was so hard for me there where I was born. I just hated to go to school. The children picked on me so. I use to have a fight every day. But dont fight any unless you have to. Try to love everybody: As she was standing there, as beautiful as she was, no one would ever know that she was a Negro unless some one told you. I ask her: Was my cousin Adline a bastard too? She said: Yes, any child horned out of wedlock was called a bastard.

At that moment some one knocked at the door. She answered. There were three musicians, who went serenading among the white homes at night. They often stoped at our house and practice a while before going out to serenade. They played. She made me dance with her a bit. Soon Mama came. The musicians left. Then Jake came. I was sent upstairs to bed.

This had been a important day for me. I was more at ease than I had been for months. It wasnt so bad to be a Negro if Negros liked you. So they must like me. I am going to make them like me. I said my prayers and went to bed.

The next morning I came downstairs, Everybody was gone except Ann. She was still in bed, sitting up in bed, sobbing and snuffing her nose. Her eyes were red. I knew she had been crying. I went to the bed and ask her what was wrong. She said: Mama dont want me to marry Jake. I am going to marry him if I have to run away. My father wants me to go up north to a school where all white people go. He dont want me to marry just now, or dont want me to marry a Negro. I love Jake and no one is going to stop me or us—nobody. She threw the cover back and slid out of bed, puting on her kimono. She said: Ill fix us some breakfast. We ate.

As we finished in came a man who played the piano when she taught dancing lessens. They had an appointement up in the corporation at eleven oclock. They left to go. She told me I could go to play with the children again. I went back to the playground. There were lots of children there. No one ask me to play. I stood around for hours watching more for that big black woman to come back again. The smaller children seem to shy me. Soon I left to go back home. I knew Ann should be home soon.

When I got home Ann hadnt come. I decided I would to see Father Eastern, and get fifty cents that he gave me once a month. When I arrived Father was walking to and frow on the yard walk. I yelled out like I used to: Hello, Father. He raised his hand as a greeting. He said: You sound like my boy Ely. I walked up to him. I was thinking what Grandpa had said yesterday: Dont have fear of anybody. Father caught my hand and we walked into the house.

He said: I was just talking to Ned this noon. He told about your visit with him yesterday. He said you didnt ask questions like you use to. He was very glad of that. You should go and see him more often. Then I ask: Father, why dont Negros like to ask questions? You said anything I wanted know ask someone that knew. That was the way to learn. You never complain, Father. He did not answer, just smiled, then said: Did you enjoy playing with the colored children? I spoke up quickly: No, Father, they wont play with me. I was called a bastard. A woman and the children just dont care to have anything to do with me. He spoke, saying: You know, Ned said you are understanding that being a Negro isnt bad at all. I am so glad you do understand.

I said: Father, Grandpa said he was a nigger an was proud of it. So if he is my grandpa I am going to be just like him but I am not going to haul nasty slop like him.

But I am not going to be afraid of anybody either. Thats the kind of man he is.

Father changed the conversation by saying: Ely, the colored school will be opening in another month and you must go. You see, all the coledges will close December the fifteenth. Then the colored school will open. John Kenily, who do janitor work now, will be free to teach the school. We dont have another colored person that is qualified as a teacher here. You must go to Sunday School every Sunday, beginning Sunday. I will tell Matt to do this. Father Clabourne will be your teacher next Sunday, and I will be there too. He reached over on the table and picked a small book and handed it to me, saying: This is your catechism to keep with you at all times. You must read it. He said: You must love everybody and be happy, and come to see me as often as you might like.

Then I ask: Father, can I get fifty cents, please? He said: Yes, you are just about due it. I thanked him and went out. I planned that the next morning I would go to the store and buy some lemon drops with this money. I would take the candy and give all of the children some. Then they would like me better and would be glad to play with me. As I walked home I thought this over. Being a Negro wasnt so bad. If this being a bastard could be forgotten I would be alright. The Negros have just got to like me. Then I will be happy—just happy. I ran almost all the way home.

I came in the house. Ann and Jake was talking. She pulled me beside her and said: Jake, Ely will live with us. He loves me so much. Jake said: Yes, he will be company for you. Then he said: I must be going. It will be time to serve dinner. Ann stood and kissed him goodbye. This was the first time I had seen her kiss any man. To see them standing there and the contrast like this: She was tall, white as could be, with deep blue eyes, gingerbread color of hair dropping to her waist, profile like an English lady, beautiful limbs, small hands and feet—size of her shoes were number three and one half—looking so much like Lillian Russell. Jake was fully six feet tall, as black as the skin of anyone could be, and as hansome as could be. He was smiling as he said goodbye. His teeth were white as pearls. so even as if a sculptor had carved them in his mouth. His shoulders was broad and square. He was all man, of a hundred and ninty pounds. He was like all of trained servents of Sewanee. I hadnt ever seen him without his collar and tie. All servants that worked in the corporation were always dressed.

When he went out Ann stood looking at the door. This was the first time I had seen a woman stimulated by romance. I really felt I was a part of them. I spoke, saying: Ann, Jake is a Negro. But he is not a bastard, is he? She looked at me for a second. The soft light from the fireplace made her aglow. Her cheeks were flush, her thin lips were so red. She put her arms around me and said: My pretty boy, no, he isnt. Then she bent down and put the side of her face against mine. And you know that woman said bastards are all pretty. Lets dance. She said: I am going to make you my dancing partner.

She swung me around a few times and said: Lets have dinner. We have sour belly, black eyed peas, and apple pie, which I cook special for you. She rolled her hair up on her head, and went into the kitchen.

Just as dinner was over in came the serenaders and began to play. This was my first lesson on dancing. Soon there were several men had come to see Ann: She was most popular with men. She danced with all of them.

Soon Mama came. She wasnt in a good humor at all. She had business to talk to Ann. Everybody left. She said to Ann: I have a job for you, and you are going to take it. You will have a chance to go to some big cities and see somthing instead of marrying some dumb nigger here. This lady wants you to be her maid and go with her when she traveles. She will be here to see you tomorrow. You will be able to see the world and learn somthing too. There is a letter from your white daddy. He dont want you to marry no black Negro. He said he would send you up north to any training school you want to go to. The white people here thinks you should wait a while and not marry now. You are just like all young girls—boy crazy—so get it off your mind.

All we children listen when Mama spoke. Ann said: Alright, Mama. I was told to go to bed. I put on my outing flannel gown, then knelt, putting my head against Anns knee, and said my prayers. Then I went upstairs to bed, wondering why they didnt like Jake. Hes a nigger and he isnt bastard. Remembering that Father said all Negroes were the same, no matter how black or how white. Early in my youth I had become to admire strong physical men like my step father was. I was wishing that I was a strong big black man like him. Ann she loved him. I do too. I thought of my plans that would be tomorrow, and how I would make all the children like me. I went to sleep.

When I was awaken Ann was patting my cheek with her hand, saying: Come to breakfast. Are you going to sleep all day? We were alone. She said: I will teach you how to ask the blessing. I told her I knew. She said: Bless the food. I said: Man that is born of a woman is in this world a few days and his heart is filled with trouble. When I looked up she was looking strait at me, frowning. Then she said: Where did you hear a blessing like that? I told her that was what Grandpa Ned said the other day when we started to eat. She said: Uncle Ned gets everything backward. They say that at burial. I want you to listen, Ely, to what I have say. Dont use the word bastard any more. The word nigger either. It is not nice for children to use these words. When any one call you those words, just say: Dont you wish you were good looking? She smiled and kissed my forehead. Then she said: Mrs. Alton will be here soon to interview me for a job. I helped her dry the dishes for the first time.

I ask her could I go to the store in the villiage. I wanted to buy some candy to give some to the children at the playground. She said: Yes, that will be nice.

Just then we heard some one calling at the front gate. It was the coachman asking was Annie home. We both went to the gate. Lady Alton and her husband got out, started to talk to Ann, saying: I know we will like you. You are very pretty. Is this boy your brother? Ann said: No, Madam, he is a boy Father Geurry ask Mama to raise. His name is Ely. The lady said: Oh, I know. He is Lenas boy.

Ann told me to go and play, not to stay too late. I went to the village to buy candy at John Ruefs store. I bought lemmon drops, two pounds for fifty cents. Then back to the play ground. There were many children that I hadnt seen before. I walked up and set the bag down on the grass, asking everybody to have some candy. They stood and looked at each other for a few moments. Then I taken the bag and passed it to everyone. Some taken a handful. Some refused; especially the ones that were there the few days before. All stop playing, just stood looking at me. Then came up two larger boys on their way over to where the big boys played. One said: What you got in that bag, Clabber? They taken the candy, and started away with it. I ran and snatched the bag, throwing the candy all on the ground. Everybody laughed.

I turned and went home to Ann. When I came in the house I was crying. Ann ask me what was wrong. I said: I dont want to talk. I went up the stairs to my bedroom. Soon Ann came up. I was lying across the bed, sobbing. She spoke, saying: Whats wrong, my pretty boy? I told her that she would not like to hear what happen. I am just a bastard, and nobody of Negros like me. Its just that way. She asked: Did the children like the candy? I explained what happened.

She said: Get up. Put on your sailor suit that Maxwell Noll sent you. I will dress, and we will go to the foot ball game with Georgie Teck. This is a game of the season. Lots of people are here to see this game. Now wont that be nice? You havent ever been to a game. So we go. She said: If Sewanee varsity beats Georgie, it will be a hot time in Sewanee tonight. We will stay uptown to see the cellerbration and the barnfire, and come home with Mama when it is over.

She helped me dress. While she was dressing she began telling me about the football team called the varsity. If they win this game and beat Vanderbilt on Thanksgiving, they would be the champs of the South. We started to the place where they played, called the ball park, a mile away. It looked like most of the colored people was going too. We had lots of company along the road. Everybody was boosting for Sewanee. When we got there it look like everybody in Sewanee was there, colored and white.

We didnt have to pay anything to go in. This was the way the program was to the colored people. Everything of sport or intertainment no colored ever paid. And hospital, clinic was all free.

Soon the teams came on the field. There were no grandstands. The playing field was roped off. Everybody stood and walked to and frow, keeping up with the play. Sewanee won twelve to six. It seem that the people went wild singing and yelling, colored and white. I was happy to think Negros was some part of white people.

We went to Dr. Bartons where our Mama worked and waited untill she finished her work. By eight oclock the main street was full of people, colored and white, waiting for the school boys to parade. They came. There were a pile of boxes and rubish two story high for the barnfire. It birned while the students paraded around it and sang the Victory song. It was something to see. It was a hot time in town that night.

We went home. There were many colored going our way. They were talking of going to Nashville when the team went to play Vanderbilt Unv. on Thanksgiving if they could have enough money. This was the first time I had heard colored people talking good about white people.

Father Eastern was right. Colored people loved white people. It was very dark. Many had lanterns so we could see how to follow the path through the woods. There were no sidewalks in the town, except on the main streets on which poor people did not live. Some of the young men with us stopt at our house and had a glass of wine.

I was soon sent to bed. As I lie in bed thinking that I would never be like the other Negros. They would not let me be a part of them. The children would never accept me. To be a child of God I will love everybody. I know tomorrow I will have to go to Sunday School. Would it be like the school day when the boys called me Clabber? I knew I had to go.

This Sunday Mama Mat didnt have to go work so we finished breakfast. I ask could I go to see the cadets and their band march to church. Mama said: Yes. I did not care to be close to the street they were on like I use to do. I just stood about two blocks away and watch them as they marched by. What a beautiful sight it was. I said to myself: It is really somthing to be a white man.

I looked on as the carriages passed by—men with high plug hats on. My mothers words came back to me when she used to say: I want you to be a fine man like that man. At this day I decided I would never be a nigger or Negro no matter what my grandfather had said. He was glad he was a nigger. Comparing him with these white men, they so neatly dressed and my grandfather so dirty and greasy and smell like slop.

I remembered I was to go to Sunday School this afternoon so I started home, thinking of my grandfarthers words: Niggers have to work day in and day out always. Be your own boss. Then you are somebody. That what I will do. I will work. Then I thought of Sunday School. I hope the children wont call me a bastard and Clabber at church.

As I was walking along came a boy four or five years older than I with a shoe shine box. He had been to some of the boarding houses, shining shoes. I hadnt seen him before this day. He wasnt playing with the other boys at the play ground. He spoke, saying: You are the boy that Mrs. Mattie Davis is raising. Your name is Ely. I said:

Yes. As I looked at him I thought to myself he must be the blackest Negro in Sewanee, but I wish I was like him. He talk all of the way home. He was different from the other boys.

I had to pass his house before I got to our house. When we got to his gate his brother was waiting for him. They look like the Gold Dust twins. The older boy was name Houston, the other was Simon. He ask me in to have some ice cream. His mother sold cream every Sunday to children. I went in. Houston told his mother who I were. He told her that Father Eastern was my conselman. Her name was Sally Smith. She was as black as she could be, and as kind as she could be. She served me a big saucer of cream.

She looked so much like the woman with the bonnet that call me a bastard, I was afraid to talk to her at first. I had finished my cream. I thanked her and told her I must be going, that I had to go to Sunday School this afternoon. Houston spoke, saying: Simon and I will be going too. We are Episcopalian. We sing in the choir. Farther Eastern will be there this evening and night. We will stop for you. I thank them and went home.

I was so happy to think of some Negros who like me. I ran the rest of the way home into the house telling Mama about these wonderful people. This seemingly was the first time for quite a while I had said any thing that pleased my Mama. I ask her could I go with them to Sunday School. She said: Yes, that these were the finest boys in Sewanee, and family. This was the beggining of a lifelong friendship.

Soon they came for me. They were so curtous, pulling off their hats and bowing to my Mama as she smiled, which she didnt do too often. They assured her they would take care of me. I tagged along behind them untill we got to the church. Farther Eastern and Father Clabourne both, and another Father who was a student of theolighy were standing out in front of the chapel.

When we came up, Father Claborne spoke to us first. Then Father Eastern said: Houston, I am so glad to see you have Ely with you. I would like you to lead him along. He is a fine boy and do need big brothers like you two. Houston answered him: I will. Then he and Simon turned and went to the vestibule to put on the cotta and gown with the choir. There were many children. Few grownups were there. No one seemed to notice me which made me very happy.

When it was over I waited untill the boys change their attire. Then they came out with Father Eastern and the student Farther. Instead of going to our home they walked home with Father Eastern which was much out of our way. When we reach Fathers house he patted us on the shoulder and said: That was a nice visit, boys. I will see you tonight. We said: Goodby, Father, as he smiled and went in his gate. As we walked away home we joined hands. I was between them. We sang as we walked. When I got home. I was so happy to tell Ann and Mama how I enjoyed going to Sunday School. This we done for many months. I would go on Sunday mornings to Mrs. Sally Smiths and help freeze the ice cream so she would let me lick the dasher.

Monday morning Ann had to go on her job. I had to go with Mama on her job. This was the first time I had decided I was going to find some work. After breakfast I went out on the street hoping to find somthing to do. The leaves had fallen in many yards where they didnt have men help. I would ask if I could rake up the leaves. I only looked for the small yards. Most of the homes were like estates, so called now—large houses of ten to fifteen rooms. The grounds were two to three acrres. Most of these homes roomed students. The whole town is built that way.

The first job I got was at Miss Mary Millers boarding house. The next was Miss Carey Johnsons home. These were small yards. I charged twenty five cents each yard which taken me three days to finish. These two ladys like me very much. They would send me to the drugstore with notes for whatever they wanted. Soon I could find somebody would give me somthing to do for a dime or quarter. This didnt last long because the schools all closed on the fifteenth of December. The vacation period was in the winter months at that time. Over half of the aristocrats went away for the winter, because it was bitter cold on the mountains. Even most of the servants went to towns in the lowlands.

All of my family stayed at Sewanee except Ann. This new job taken her away. She traveled with Lady Alton. She went to Louisvill, New Orleans, Nashvill, Atlanta, Memphis. For three months Mama and I stayed home. She quilted several quilts. I batted cotton for the quilts.

Days when it wasnt too cold I would go to see Houston or my brother. I didnt care about playing with children any more. Houston and Simon never went to play with the other boys. They stayed at home. They studied books. They had a organ they played. They were always busy. Mrs. Sally taught them to keep busy, so when I could be with them I was learning somthing like I was when I was with Mother Geurry and her family.

The town was just dead for three months. School would open March the fifteenth. All of the colored people that had gone would be back and white people too. The only amusement for the colored was to play cards—a game named five up which was played with pardners. They would go from house to house to play. Seems they all injoyed it.

Gambling was much forbiddin in Sewanee. People didnt have much money. Wages was low. The popular wage for adults was ten dollars a month no matter what you done. Your meal was given. That was somthing. No one ever went hungary in Sewanee. The men that done construction got one dollar a day for ten hours, which most of them lived on with their family. Everybody had credit at the grocers. If they ran out of money during this vacation period, they lived on credit untill school open.

Many of the white people that were still there they drive around among the colored people, asking how they were doing. There was always a doctor you could go to without cost. Medicine could be obtained. If you didnt have money you could charge it untill you were able to pay. This was when I first heard the song called “Sewanee”:

I see the train
Coming around the bend
Loaded with Sewanee men
Too lazy to work
Too honest to steal
Coming back to Sewanee
To get a square meal.

Christmas had been. I enjoyed it more this year than I had since my mother had died. I had gone to the Xmas tree which was given by the church. It was mostly for the Sunday school attendents. No one carried presents. Every one went to get presents, which was toys, clothes, candy, popcorn, many things that would supply your needs. This was the first time I had seen a Xmas tree. I got so many presents, particularly a drum. It was a beauty. Houston got many presents. He taken me with him to the tree.

It use to be down South on Christmas people shot fire works. On Xmas after the tree was over there was a Roman candle battle with the larger boys, which was very pretty to see. There were many white people there to see we children enjoy ourselves. All childrens arms were filled with present given through charity. Father Claborne blessed us. This was my first happiness for some time. I had forgotten about being a bastard or a Negro. I had friends—not only white people but Negros. Houston and Simon had added so much to my life.

School had opened for the colored. The weather was so rough Mama did not make me go and I didnt want to go. It only lasted three months any way. Prof. Kenely was studying to be an Episcopal Father. He taught school some time and served as janateor mostly. He often taught the Sunday School class. Uncle Calvin Childress played the organ, all by ear. He had a band, for which the white people had helped buy the instruments. They played country music all by ear.

I heard so much about what the Negros done in Sewanee. They had football teams, baseball teams. They were coached by the colledge coach. We were the best around. Teams would come from all towns to play our teams. White people would attend the games and contribute to the help of expense.

Nineteen and five Fisk University came to play. The colored people could not accomodate them, so the white people made room in the dormitory for them. They ate and slept there. These colored students was so amazed over this that every student that could get a job in the hotels would come in the summer. This was the real Sewanee sixty years ago.

When my sister Ann returned from her job and travel she told of all things she had seen and how wonderful Mrs. Alton had been to her. How she had passed for white at times for better accomadation, and how she had combed her hair with the ladys comb and brush, and how white men that didnt know she was a Negro had flirted with her, telling how she and her madam has laughed about it. Her madam had told her she should go north where her oppotunity would be greater. She had an article she had won in New Orleans where she won a waltz contest. She lost in the cake walk.

When Ann got back Mama and I had been so lonsome for her that Mama gave in that she could marry Jake. The engagment was anounce. It created an interest among many of the white. They would stop their carrages in front of the house and call Mama out. I would go with her. They would ask her why should she let her marry a man as black as Jake. All Mama would say was: Are we not all Negros? They would shake their heads and drive away. Some of them had sent for Ann to come and see them. They tried to talk her out of it. So Ann soon would not talk to them at all. (This is where I refuse to call names of people.) This went on for weeks.

Mama was much unhappy about the way white people were concerned. So one night while she was quilting and us sewing sitting by the fireplace she said: I dont understand white people. They bring about bastards and then want to rule their lives. And cant use them. Why cant we live our own lives? Ive had your same trouble when I was freed of slavery. Now you and perhaps Ely will have the same thing. Their sins live with us all our lives. Your father hasnt done anything for you. Not like he should have. Now he wants to tell you how he wants you to live your life. So dont pay any attensian to anyone. Jake is a good man, and that is that.

Ann rose from her seat, went over to Mama and put her arms around her from the back. They were sheding tears. Ann said: This means so much to me, Mama.

This was the first time I had seen Mama Mat cry. Because she was a most stern woman I ever knew. I dont think she was afraid of any thing. Her husband had died three years after their marriage, leaving two children, both boys, one six months, the other one and a half years old. She never married again. Two years later Ann was born. She worked and raised her own. She had to be a strong woman. Later she raised my mother, and now she was raising me. That night I knew she was all I could ever wish for as a mother.

The wedding taken place in about two weeks. We had somewhat a party. White people that had protested, many came in carrages. They brought many presents. What didnt bring things, they sent them—almost everything the couple could use for housekeeping. They were given their funiture, dishes, rugs, cooking utensils. Much was used, but still it was better than they were able to buy.

Mama moved things out of the house so people could dance. The white people left as soon as the ceremony was over. The colored people danced and partied all night. There was string music. This night no one told me when to go to bed so I stay up with the party. Ann and Jake they were such a handsom couple.

They left the next morning on the six oclock train for Winchester, Tenn., ten miles away, to spend a week honeymoon in the town he was raised. Returning they decided to live with Mama Mat. We had a happy family.

Soon the schools opened. Sewanee was back out of hibernation. Mama went back to work for Dr. Barton. I stayed with Ann most of the time. By having Houston and his brother to play with and Ann too, I forgot about the Acadamy boys. Nothing much changed for two years for me. I would see Farther Eastern at Sunday School.

The next year Ann gave birth to a boy. A few weeks later our house burned. We lost almost everything we had. All my happiness faded out. We had to move across town where there were no children at all. I was around twelve years old. Houses was scarce. This was the only place we could get. Mrs. Weber, a white lady, let us live in a house in the back of her estate. We were given almost everything we had lost in the fire. This is the way white people treated the Negros then.

Mama taken rhematisim badly, had to stop cooking. She and Ann started doing hand laundry. This kept me most busy. I had to look after her son and carry water from the well to wash with. I didn’t see any children only on Sunday when I went to Sunday School. They bought me a wagon so I could deliver clothes in. Things changed for me. I was not loved like I had been. Soon no one ever thought of me only when they need me to do somthing.

I became to be stubom. Then I was whipped almost for the least thing. Everything of the past of unplesantness came back in my mind. I started to resenting that I was a Negro again. I would alway know I was a bastard and an orphan.

I had been given a dog name Tepsey. This was the only friend I felt I had. I would run away and go into the woods and stay for hours, just I and my dog. So often I would sit and tell him my troubles. It seemed he understood. Then return home to take my whipping. This lasted almost two years.

One morning a man rode up to our gate on a sorrel horse. I called Mama to the door. She yelled out: Thomas! What are you doing here? He came in. He hug Mama and Ann. He said: Just rode over here from Bridgeport, Alabama, to see you, Mat.

He told her he would like her to come and keep house for him. I am your cousin. I am now all alone. My girls have married and moved away. I have a good business. My livery stable is doing good. I need someone to keep house for me. You know how I will treat you. Just like I did twelve years ago when you came to me when Ann was small. Think it over.

Mama fixed him breakfast while he unsadled his horse. I said: Mama, take me with you. I was holding her grandson in my lap. She said to him: I only hate to leave you. She loved him so much. I did too, only it taken all my time nursing him. If anything happend to him that caused him to cry I was whipt.

Uncle Tom came in, sat down for breakfast. She showed him the baby. Uncle Tom said: Mat, if you will come to me and try it. Its not like it was before when you had three children and I had two. You dont have any one. So if you dont like it I will send you back anytime.

Mama began to serve the breakfast. It consisted of sausage, grits, fried apples, and buttermilk buscuit. Uncle Tom sat for a minute looking at the food, then said: Mat, you cant write and I cant either, so this is why I rode sixty miles over the mountains to see you face to face, and explain things to you so you can see how bad I need you. I havent had a meal like this and taste like this in years. Over there you have a horse and buggy anytime you want it. You have your Babtist church to attend which you dont have here. These white peoples religion is nothing. You can have anything you want.

We all were listening. Mama was holding her grandson, feeding him bits of apple. I looked at Mama. I saw for the second time a tear falling from her cheeks. Uncle Tom continued to talk. When she was silent we all sat for a while, as if thinking for the best. Mama finally spoke, asking how long was he going to stay. He said: I am going to Winchester tomorrow to see Grant. I will be there one day, then I will start back to Bridgeport.

Then Mama said to Ann: You know, Ann, Jake is going to go to Texas to try the job that the student that room at the Vanness boarding house. His father is a big man and rich. He offered to send for Jake and pay him sixty dollars a month. Uncle Tom retorted: That is some wages. Ann said: Thats far more than fifteen dollars a month. We are going if he sends for us. Jake thinks he should go first to see if he like it. Then send for me.

Then Mama said: Tom, there is somthing you dont know about. That boy sitting by you I have agreed to raise him. He is Ned Greens grandson. Lena was his mother. I promised her before she died that I would raise him. So I will have to take him with me. This may be a good thing for him. He has the same trouble, by his father being white, that Ann had in Winchester when she was small. Thats why I came to you the last time. Uncle Tom said: Bring him. I forgot to tell you about a boy I take care of. His mother died and left him. I just couldnt see the boy go to an orphan home. So I taken him. Hes a couple of years older than this boy. They will make a good team.

Mama said: He can go to school too. I will have to talk to the white people about this. You see, his Godfather is Bishop Gailor. Mrs. Dr. Richison is his Godmother. His father is one of the high up familys of the town. They promised to help me with him. Its been very little so far. Now if everything is alright, I think I will go. Uncle Tom said: Mat, I wouldnt worry about that.

White people dont do anything for their bastards. That is the same conditon with this boy I have with me. His father is a Jew who has a clothing store in Bridgeport. He taken the advantadge of this boys mother when she was sixteen. After he was born the girl just turned to be a sportting woman and died ten year later. The child just lived from house to house. He loved horses so he hung around the stable so much trying to be of help. He liked me so I just adopted him. His father has never give him one dime. You know what I think of white people. They are no good. Thats why I just dont work for them.

I was proud of Uncle Tom. He was like Grandpa Ned. I just had to butt in, asking Uncle Tom: Can I take my dog with me? He put his hand in his pocket and pulled out a dollar, and gave it to me, saying: This is his fare to Alabama. Then Uncle Tom said: When will you be ready to leave, Mat? Mama said: It will be at least three weeks, Tom, before I will be there. We are going to move next week over where the Negros live in the Bottom. We can get the Pete Ferris house. They are going to Texas next week.

I didnt have much to do with her sons. They both worked of jobs and lived in. When they came about, it was like a short visit. Tommy Davis worked for the city doctor and surgeon of the town. He served him like a nurse aide and drove the carraige. The other worked as butler and waiter for the Gallier family. Both were fine atheletes, played football and baseball. They help train the white school boys to bat. Both were good pitchers, one left-handed, the other right. Many of these colored men was hired to work with the white teams. For this reason they were never around only at night when I was in bed. Neither were married. When Uncle Tom ask about them this she explained. I was told to go to spring and get fresh water, which I had to do three times a day. When I got back Uncle Tom was asleep. I was told to take Arthur and play away from the house. Not make any noise so Uncle Tom could sleep. Ann and Mama had started to ironing their wash. About noon Mama called us in. I had to deliver some laundry to the Gillem home.

It just came to me that in Bridgeport I wont have to nurse children and wont have to carry water to fill barrells. I wont be call bastard nor Clabber. I will go to school. I can be like my Uncle Tom and Grandpa Ned. They like to be Negros. I am going to be like them. I will be a man when I come back and will beat up anyone that call me names. I wont be afraid of no one. I like those words.

I reached the Gillem home. As I started up the driveway I met Mrs. Gillem in her carrage. She stop as I pulled my wagon off side. She spoke: You have the laundry from Mat. You are Ely. Here is the money, seventy five cents, I taken it. She said: Put in your pocket and dont lose it. Take the clothes to the back door and call Lisa. She will take them. We are late for the party at the McCradys.

There beside her sat a Negro woman, very old with white hair parted in the middle, dressed in white. Then she said: Mamy, we had better be going, and drove away. I left the laundry and went home. All the way home I was wondering if this Negro woman could be this white womans mother. She called her Mamy, and they are going to a party. I rushed home. This time I am going ask some questions if it causes a whipping. Ann had changed so much since her son had been borned. She did not talk to me like she use to.

I rushed into the house to see Uncle Tom was up putting on his boots. Mama and Ann was sitting in front of the fireplace. I handed Mama the money, and said: Mama, please let me ask a question. Uncle Tom said: What is it? Is Mrs. Gilliams mother a Negro? She was riding with an old Negro. Her hair was as white as cotton, and she called her Mamy and said they were going to a party. I just had to ask you. All three looked at each other. Ann was smilling.

Uncle Tom said: There is nothing wrong in asking that you dont know. Mama then said: No, that is not her mother by birth. Her name is Clara. She raised Mrs. Gilliam from a baby. Mrs. Gilliams mother died with childberth. Mamy Clara wet-nursed her and has been beside her all of her life. This is called the black mamy. Some white people think it honorable to keep them around. She take her to teas and partys with her and she sits in the parlor like everyone else.

Uncle Tom said: Son, its like this in the South. A negro is a boy until you are a man. Then you are a dad or uncle. Women are aunts or mamys. This white man and his law—they uncles and mamy they carry around with, they are try to square themselves with God for the way they have worked them half to death. I like to hear him talk. He spoke with force and asurance as if he knew what he is talking about.

He said: Mat, I am riding to Winchester now. I can cover this ten miles partly down hill in an hour and a half. It is three o clock. Will see you all tomorrow night. He went out. I went with him to saddle his horse. He rode away on a beautiful horse.

I went in the house. I knew this is Wednesday, the day to carry water to fill the barrel. Mama said: You wont have to carry water today. We are moving tomorrow over in the Pete Ferris house.

That night Jake came home most glad. He had a money order for one hundred dollars his white friend had sent for his train fare to Waxahachie, Texas, where he would report for work in ten days for the Trinity University. It is an Presbyterian coed school. He said: I will leave in three days. I have alredy told Mrs Vanness about it.

The next morning we start packing things for moving. My job was catching all the chickens and pigs, which was fun for me and my dog. In two days we were all settled. I found my job much harder. I had to carry water twice as far. Carrying clothes to and frow was much farther. I had to stay busy all day, every day.

Jake left for Texas. Ann was all alone, she and her small son. Neither of her two brothers ever live with her. So Mama Mat decided it would be better to leave me for awhile and she go to Alabama alone and send for me later, which she did. I would go to her Xmas, which was five weeks from now. I was back around the colored people I had tried to be friends with three years ago. We lived just two hundred yards from the playgrounds where the colored children played, although I didnt care to play. In fact, I did not have time to play.

Ann was a fine laundry woman. She had all the work she could do working from ten to fifteen hours a day. Since Mama had left my work had doubled. I had to clean house, wash dishes, help with her son, and do most of the delivery. The only time I had any enjoyment was on Sunday when I went to Sunday School. No one had called me a bastard or Clabber at Sunday School. This was why I enjoyed it so much. All the Fathers were so kind to me.

Ann become to be more like she use to be when I first came to them. She often went with me carrying the delivery. I found out she was trying to make money to go to Texas. I wanted to help all I could.

One morning a man name Mr. Rosbourogh rode up to the gate on his horse, and called for Ann. He had a small package of laundry, asking would she do this as a special favor for his wife and have it back tomorrow by noon. He said to Ann: You know, you and Mat are the best wash women in this town. My wife Sarah thinks so. I am sorry that you people are going away to Texas. Jake I know has already gone. Mat has gone to Alabama. That leaves you and Ely alone. Now dont let anything worry you. If you should need me just let me know. And when Ely grows up I want him to be my butler.

He said goodbye and rode away. We stood watching his beautiful horse striding down the road. Ann said to me: He is the most handsome man in Sewanee. I have heard that he is a Jew. I cant help what he is. He sure is good to colored people.

Many of Anns friends came by that afternoon. So many were going to Nashville to the Vanderbilt game of football on Thankgiven. Almost everybody in the town that could afford it, both colored and white, all went to see this game between Sewanee and Vanderbilt. Everybody felt they were a part of this coledge. It was their pride and joy.

The next morning at eleven oclock Ann gave me the package to take to Mrs. Rosebourgh. She tell me to not crush it because this is two blouses she will take to Nashville to wear. So dont put them under your arm. Dont lose any thing going. They catch the afternoon train. This was Wednesday. I had to go a good mile from where we lived into the corporation.

I hadnt seen Mrs. Rosbourogh for two years. She and her husband both were younger than most people that kept a home in the corporation. She was a beautiful woman. When I entered with the laundry she spoke so kindly, telling me how nice Ann was to do this odd job for her. She gave me a half dollar as a tip, saying: This is for getting here early. And when you grow up you will be my houseman, and I will teach you everything in a training. I was very happy. This was the first time any one had ever given me a half dollar as a tip.

I started back home. I stated before how large the grounds were where these people lived. Their yard sizes were from one acre to five. There were few streets that was strait for more than five blocks. The streets were like trails meandering around the estates, so there were no objection of tresspassing through an estate. I started to cut down my walking by going through yards.

When I got to Mrs. Tuckers—she had the biggist boarding house in Sewanee—she was buying turkeys that was already dressed from a peddler who supply many of the homes with poultry and dairy product. His name was Crownover. I stop to look at the turkeys. I hadnt seen turkeys sold dressed before.

Mrs. Tucker was figuring the amount to write the check. As she turned to go in the house she saw me. I pulled off my cap and bowed to her. She said: Ely, you are sure growing up. I heard you had gone to Alabama with Mat. I explained that I was going later. Then I said: I havent seen turkeys sold like that. She said: Its good to buy them that way. Tommorrow is Thanksgiving Day. All of the students have gone to Nashville to the game. There are very few boarders left here for Thanksgivin dinner, so I want as many of the servants that I know to come and have dinner here. Would you like to come? I thanked her, assuring her I would. She started to the house, saying:

The call to dinner is at one thirty. We will hear somthing of the game by then. I thanked her and went on my home.

I had to pass Father Easterns house. I stopped in for a minute to tell him about me going to Alabama. He was sitting by the window, facing the street. He beckoned me with his hand to come on in. I opened the door and went in the study where he was writing. I explained to him that I was going away. He said: I know that. Mat talked to Father Gerry. Its alright. Mat thinks it will be good for you, the change. You can go to school also. I want you to be a good boy, study hard, go to church and Sunday School. You havent missed a Sunday going to Sunday School since you started three years ago. Thats a good record for you. Write me once and a while. I do want to know about you. I thank him and went out. This was the first I had been to Fathers house in two years. I would see him at Sunday School two or three times a month.

I ran most of the way home. I knew I had lost a bit of time. Ann would be angry. When I got home I rushed into the house. Ann wanted to know what kept me so long. I gave her the dollar the lady gave me for her. Ann was suprised to get a dollar for just two blouses even if the collars and cuffs trimming was fluted. She forgot all about me being late.

I told her that Miss Emma Tucker told me to come to dinner tomorrow. Could I go? She smiled and said: Yes, little Negro boy. Thats about the only way you will eat turkey will be at some white peoples house. Turkey is much too rich for Negro blood.

Ann continued talking, as she ironed, about Mrs. Emma Tucker being such a Christian lady, always treating colored people nice. And her three daughter were the same way. She said: She was good to Lena, your mother, when she was sick. Often she sent food to her, tasty food that she thought she would enjoy. I love her so much. She and many of these ladys helped me get nursing jobs when I was a young girl. She is just sweet.

She said: You carry the water today, and tomorrow you can have the whole day to do what you would like, because we are going to be very busy this next two weeks. I am going to get Grace Childress to help do the washing for me. You see the schools all closes in two weeks. Lots of ladies will want quick laundry done. There will be dances and partys aplenty. You will have lots of delivery. This is fast money. You see, my boy, I am depending on you. I was so happy to think that I meant so much to her. I carried water and filled the two barrels by five oclock. Ann said: Little boy, when I finish ironing this piece we will have to go to the store and do some shopping. You need some clothes. I didnt have but two pair of pants and they had been patched so much they were almost quilted.

We went to the villidge to Mr Winns store. Her son was large enough for me to carry him on my back. We taken him along. She bought me a pair of patent leather shoes, a cap, a pair of pants with bows at the knees, which all cost four dollars. I was now dressed up. I was so proud and happy.

The next morning I helped her with the dishes. When we were through I dressed and went on my way. I stopped at Mrs. Sally Smiths house to see Houston and Simon. I hadnt been to their house in two years. They were much glad to see me. They ask me to have dinner with them. They were having turkey. Mrs. Sally said: We raise our turkeys. There were many turkey in the yard. This was why they could afford it. I told them I was going to Mrs. Tuckers for dinner. Mrs. Sally said: I understand Mrs. Tucker wants to feed anybody she can. I stayed a half hour and went on to Mrs. Tuckers.

As I walked along I thought of the Smiths, how they were different from other colored people. We had never had turkey at home. Grandpa raised turkeys. He never ate them. He always sold them to the white people. He ate lots of chickens but no turkey.

When I arrived at Mrs. Tuckers I was too early. It was twelve thirty. The white people was eating. We wouldnt eat untill they had finished, which would be one thirty. So Aunt Harriet told me to go to the servant quarters and see Uncle Peter, her husband. He was very old, too old to do much work. Mrs. Tucker just let him stay around. He had worked for her for many years.

I went in to his room. He was very hard of hearing. When I told him who I was, he chuckeled a bit and told me many stories of the past of his life. He liked to talk about slavery, which I did like to hear.

This one story I have thought of so many times: how the Ku Kluck Klan got started. He said many of the men slaves would slip off and go to other plantations to dance at corn shucking. The next day they would be worn out, not fit for work. So many of the masters had talked ghost stories to the slaves to create fear in them. So when they would find their slaves had sliped off, they would wrap in white sheets and waylay them comming home. Then they chase after them, which would almost scare them to death. At first it was called patrol. It worked so well on the slaves that it was used on the carpetbagger after the war. That was when they named themselves K.K.K. It became to be an organization that also created violence. He would talk a little and have his laugh awhile, enjoying his own story.

One of the waitress came to the door and told us dinner was ready. He got his cane and we came out to the kitchen, where Aunt Harriett his wife was the cook. She told us to go to the table outside on the porch.

When we went out there were about fifteen colored people sitting at the table. They were waiting for the maids to bring the food on: my stepfather, my grandfather Ned, Uncle Marcus, who was the barber for the white people. He ate dinner here every day. There were seven servants and four other people I didnt know.

Just as the food was put on the table and all was ready to eat, Mrs. Emma Tucker came out to the table. She was smiling as she stood at the end of table. Everybody stood up. She said, smiling: This makes me so happy to have so many of you young and old here to enjoy what God has given us. Most of you have served me faithfully. I am so grateful to have you come enjoy yourslves. Then she said: Uncle Peter, will you bless the food? He did. She went back in the house.

We ate this dinner. The menu was turkey, oyster dressing, com pudding, the best ever, rice, jiblet gravy, English peas, cranberry sauce, plum pudding, brandy sauce. What a dinner! How every one ate! No one could cook like Aunt Harriett. Just as we finished, there was a comotion in the house. The guests was yellering. Mrs. Tucker came out and said: They telephoned from Nashville that Sewanee was leading Vanderbilt at the half twelve to six. Everybody began to shout, even Uncle Peter and Aunt Harriett. Everyone was excited.

Soon we were ready to leave. One of the waitress said to Grandpa Ned: Uncle Ned, wont you do us a spiritual table-walking tonight? This I hadnt heard of before, that my grandfather could make a table walk. I knew nothing of this. After a few minutes pleading by these girls, he agreed to, if there were as many as ten of them. He would do a spiritual interpretatian that night at his house, and come before ten oclock.

Then Mrs. Tucker came out agan. She said: It was good that you all came. Some of you are a part of me. She look at me, putting her hand on my shoulder, saying: This boys mother was the finest girl that was ever in Sewanee. She served me and every one so willingly, and, Ely, I do hope you will carry her thoughts. She started back into the house. She called to Aunt Harriett, saying: Give whats left to Lee and Ned. Every one said goodby.

I said: Grandpa, can I go home with you? I had not seen much of him since we moved on the other side of town. I wanted to see the table walk tonight. He said: Ill be going as soon as I empty these slop cans. And dont ask so many questions. You have very quiet here today. You have acted like a child ought to. Be seen and not heard. You are better liked. Staying around Negros has helped you a lot.

Soon we were on our way. I noticed Grandpa was just as greasy and dirty as he was the last time I saw him. I rode all the way home with him. He never said one word to me. He mumbled to himself all the time. When we got to the pens, he had to empty the slop. Then we went to his house. I noticed he had many more cows then he had when I was there last two years ago.

When we went into the house, he bilt the fire up. It was chilly. Then he had a jug of whiskey. He made a tody for me and taken a drink from the jug, then put it down, saying: Jack Daniels make the best whiskey in the whole world.

Then he handed me the broom, saying: Sweep the house clean. I must clean up a bit. Then I am going to teach you how to milk. I have ten cows all giving milk, and all Jerseys. When we finished, he went out. I went with him.

There was a small tree, a rope hanging from it. He pulled the rope over to him, taking a sack tied to a limb, then said: This coon should be just right now for cooking. We went back in the house. He take the animal out. It was all dressed for cooking. I had seen many coons cooked, but this had longer legs than any I had seen. He cut it up and put it in the fireplace kettle and swung it over the blaze to cook.

We went out to milk. He gave me a bucket. He showed me how to squeeze the tit and pull. The cow kicked me and the bucket away. This was the first time I had seen him laugh for a long time. He finished. He said: I dont deliver milk this evening, because the white people are all in Nashville. So we will take a nap before them gals come to hear their fortune. He strained the milk.

Then he looked at the coon, and said: Dont he smell good? He taken another drink of whiskey, and went over to the bed and got a pillar, put it on the floor in front of the fireplace and layed down on the floor. He told me that if the pot boiled over to wake him.

I sat by the fire, thinking how can this man tell fortunes and make a table walk? I kept thinking how different he is from other people. He lives alone. Why dont he get in bed? He must not like me even if I am his grandson. He never comes to see like he does Eddie Lee, my brother. I am going away. When I come back I will be grown. Then he will want to talk to me. Maybe I wont want to talk to him. I sat there for three hours looking in the fire. There was a knock on the door. I opened it. A Negro man was standing on the porch. He said: Would you let me come in and get warm? I awaken Grandpa. He ask him in.

The man said: I am on my way to Nashville. I have been working in the mines at Tracy City. I was layed off. We colored people only get to work when its booming. I was just about to starve. I had to leave that town. I was hoboing my way. They put me off at Mont Eagle, a little town about eight miles from here. So I am walking my way.

Grandpa got up off the floor, pulled the pot from over the blaze, punched the fork in the coon, and said to me: It is done. He hadnt said anything to the man at all. The man was very tall, looked to be almost as old as Grandpa. Still standing, Grandpa looked at the man, then said: I am Ned Green. Have a seat. This is my grandson. The man said: I am Wesley Howard. He sat down. He and Grandpa talked about the hard times Negros have keeping in work.

Grandpa ask: Are you hungry? Wesley said: I havent eaten in two days. Grandpa kinder chuckled and said: I have a big coon cooked here if you would like it. Wesley said: Would I like it? Grandpa went to the kitchen for a plate and some milk. I didnt want any. Grandpa didnt eat any either, not just now. Wesley ate the third helping. Grandpa urged him to eat all he could.

It was after nine. The girls would be coming soon. Wesley ask could he let him sleep somewhere tonight. Grandpa said: I have no place to put you. I have only one bed. You can sleep in the barn in the hay if you dont smoke and set the hay afire. Wesley thanked him and went out to the barn, thanking Grandpa for such a good dinner.

Grandpa sat there looking amused about somthing. I was wondering what. He laughed, and said: You know, this is the first time l ever cooked a fox. I caught him in a trap. He has been stealing my chickens. He was so fat. I knew some one would come along and I would have to feed them. He sure did eat that fox, over half of it. Lets we taste it. I said: No, sir, they say a fox is a dog, Grandpa, and we are not to eat dogs. He put the lid on the pot, hilt the fire up bright, changed his clothes, telling me not to be asking questions during the spirital service. I told him I would not.

Soon the girls came—seven girls, three men. There was not enough chairs. Some had to sit on the bed. I had to get on the bed back of them. Grandpa went into the kitchen and brought the table in, put it in the center of the room. He pulled the drawer half out, then said the spirits would go in this drawer when they came, not likely before twelve oclock.

We just sit and think of what we want our spirits to tell us. If you dont believe in spirits it will be hard for me to get a message for you. Sometimes I fail, not often. Dont be scared of sounds. Dont talk, only when I tell you to. We will be silent for a while. Dont go to sleep. You will get sleepy. Keep thinking of who you want to hear from.

The clock was striking eleven. He said: We will go into the spiritual world. Now, just sit quiet for a while. He sat down to the table putting his hands flat on the table with the palm down. There he sat. Everything was so quiet. I layed back on the pillar.

When I awaken the service was over. Everybody was asking him: What did this mean? He was telling them: That is what the spirits said. He didnt know the thoughts. They were standing looking at each other, puzeled evidently at what had happened.

One of the men turned the table over, looking as if he thought it was a trick table. Then he righted it again, and said: I thought the legs was going to break. It sure did crack and move. I was so disapointed that I went to sleep. I had heard Mama Mat talk about him making the table walk. It was twelve thirty now. Every one left, I went with them. They would pass our house. As we walked home, all they talked about was Grandpa and what they were to expect. I went in home. Ann was still up. The baby was not well. I started to tell about my experience at Grandpas. She said: I have seen it. He is good. I went to bed.

The next morning Ann was telling me to get up and go to the vilidge and get six bars of soap. This was wash day. When I got to the store, I learned that Sewanee had beat Vanderbilt. The eight thirty train had arrived. The team was in a band wagon. The students were pulling it with a long rope, about a hundred of them. Everybody was celerbrating.

For weeks the colored people that went to Nashville that was the talk of how Sewanee trounced the Comadores. All day Friday and night Sewanee celerbrated, black and white. I was like the rest. I loved everything about Sewanee, even if I could not go to school like the white people.

Saturday morning I was taking some laundry to Vanness house. I met a lady and her son, name Gertrue Coaly. Her son was named Marland. She was the cook here. While I was standing on the porch waiting for the money this kind lady who was brown skin, short, a bit fat, said: You are Ely, arent you? I said: Yes, slowly, because I never knew what to expect to be said to me. I might be called bastard or Clabber. So I was always on guard. Not many people had kind things to say to me.

She looked at me for a moment. Then she said: I have a boy. You may know him. His name is Marland. I knew your mother. She had big plans for you. Too bad she had to leave you. I have heard that you are a smart boy and a lot of helpe to your family. Its too bad you dont have some one to send you to school. It would be good if you could go to Winchester where there is a good school. You have a auntie there, you know. They have a fine school there taught by Dr. Townsend. I am most proud of my boy. He will graduate at fifteen. He is going to be a doctor when he grow up.

I ask: Where is your son? She smiled and said: He is somewhere problely talking with some of the white students. They keep him with them most of the time. He enjoys being around them. They think he is very smart and they have a lot in common.

One of the maids brought me the money. I said: Good bye. She said: Wait. I will give you a piece of cake. While waiting a boy came up the steps. He said to me: Hello.

I knew I had seen him before. He was the one I heard talking at the confectionary stand. He and about fifteen S.M.A. cadets were discussing. He was talking about some man I never heard of. He was saying that his work hadent been completed acording to history—he, Arostotale, Socrates, Plato. I had walked away thinking a man with such name had to be somebody. Only thing concerned me was how could they have fun with a Negro. I wondered if they called him a nigger.

I didnt know who he was, untill she came to the porch with a piece of cake. She said: This is my son. She kissed him on the forehead, asking him did he have a plesant day. He said: Yes, Mother. He called the names of some students. We have been out to Morgan Steep. They are preparing for their exams next week. They say I am a lot of help to them. We will meet there tomorrow and study and debate.

He had a book in his hand which he said: I must read this book tonight. It is on English pholosphy. As I looked at her I could see she was so proud of him, her son. I said goodbye, not thinking that this boy and I would thirty years later become to be close friends two thousand miles away in another state, California, where he became to be one of our finest doctors.

As I walked home I couldnt help but think how a mother loves her own. She was so proud of him. He is educated. White people like Negros that are educated. Could I become to be that way? It is somthing to have people to like you. I wondered why he never comes to play ball over in the Bottom where the Negros live. I wondered if he was a bastard. White people seem to like bastards but Negros dont. He is light-complected with coarse black hair, looks like an Indian. Perhaps he is. His mother said she knew my mother.

I decided that afternoon I was going to be educated, reguardless what Grandpa had said it wasnt needed by a Negro. I am in some way going to be educated. I will do as Father Eastern had so many times told me: I should go to school. This I must do. I dont know how I will do it. I will go to Winchester to this great man Dr. Townsend.

When I got home there was another delivery ready. Ann was waiting for me. She went with me. The wagon was loaded with laundry. We had five different houses to deliver. That was why she went. Also we had to pick up laundry to bring back. All the ladies were getting ready for the Commencment dances to be held at Forensic Hall.

Stopping at the Rosborough home was our last stop. Mrs. Rosborough was delighted to have Ann to come by herself. She told Ann if she needed anything while her husband was away just let them know, saying: We are your friend. I loved this lady for her kindness so much. We started for home a half mile off. Ann talk much about the fine white friends we had, stating the Rosboroughs was her choice and the Colmores.

As we started through the park a white man of the sager class or poor white trash, so called by the Negros and the aristocrats, walked up to us and said: Ann, you know you are just about the prettiest colored woman I ever saw. You are too white to be a Negro and married to one. Ann at first did not speak, just walk past him as if he wasnt there. He followed us, trying to persuade her to stop and talk to him, that he wanted to be a friend to her. I could tell that Ann was very angry.

As we approached the styles that went over the corporation fence, he rushed by us and stood on the styles steps, blocking our passages. I climbed over the wire fence. Then Ann handed the laundry over, a bundle at a time, and then the tin wagon.

I thought she going to climb the fence after me. Instead, she pulled the hat pin from her hat. She stood for a moment looking at the man. She almost screamed at him, saying: Perry if you dont get out of my way I will ram this hat pin through you. Then she started towards him. He cleared the styles. She walked over, he aside about ten feet from her. He said: I just wanted to be a friend to you. He went another diretion. I hadnt seen Ann so angry before.

She said: There is nothing as low as poor white trash. Thats why they dont allow them to work in the corporation. They are just as the rich people say they are. They dont allow them to even knock at the front door. Whatever they have to sell they have to go to the back. I dont blame them. By this time we were in the colored settlement. We had to pass through it. There was a middle aged white woman with Mother Hubbard style dress on, like most of the mountain woman wore, with a coal oil can in one hand, a tin in the other. Ann said: Ely, you see her? I said: Yes. She said that is Aunt Liz. She is selling whisky called moonshine, fifteen cents a drink only to Negros. She said: She is a kind old woman, but there isnt nothing a sager wont stoop low enough to do.

It was almost dark when we got home: five fifteen. Ann started to cook dinner. I had to break up kindling for starting the fire next morning. Someone called from the gate: Ann. I rushed in the house to the kitchen, told Ann there was someone at the gate calling her. I didnt even look to see who it was.

She went to the door asking what they wanted. Perry said: Ann, come here. I just got to talk to you. Ann became furious, began to swear. I sat on the steps. She went and got the pistol, come back to the door. Then said: Perry, if you dont leave me alone and leave my gate I will shoot you. He retorted back: Thats just what you will have to do. No Negros going to shoot no white man, and better not. At that moment she shot. I saw the fellow whirl around, almost go to his knees.

I ran up to Ann, saying to her: You hit him. I knew she had never shot a gun before. She was trembling, holding the gun in her hand. We could hear him running toward the poor white town. Ann then said: I bet he wont trouble another Negro woman.

Then she said: This could cause trouble. I said: I am going for help because I heard the Negros say you dont dare do anything to white people. I thought of what Mr. Rosborough had said: If she ever need him just let him know.

I broke away out of house going to Mr. Rosebourgh. I had to run a half mile which I was going to do. As I entered the main street about halfway to his house, I heard the sound of a galloping horse. I saw it was Mr. Rosborough, going home from the store. I stood out in the road with my hands up. He stop.

I was so excited I couldnt hardly talk at first. When I was able to tell him what happened, he said: Did she kill him? I told him he ran away. He was a fine strong man. He reached for my hand. With very little effort he swung me up back of him.

He said: We will have to go a mile around to the gates. I think I had better go to the village and stop anything that might be brewing. Then get to Ann later. He turned his horse around, headed for the poor white settlement in full gallop.

When we reached the village there was a gathering in front of the big store. Perry was standing in the middle of them with a bandage around his head. We rode up to them. Mr. Rosborough said to Perry: How bad are you hurt? He said: Not too bad. I am lucky. That nigger buck Jake shot me for nothing.

Another one said: The bullet just grazed him. Left a scalping job. It only stunned him. We are going to teach that nigger a lessen. No nigger is going to shoot a white man in Tenn. and get away with it. You aristicrats pet the nigger. They are so high collarded that they have to be put back in their place. We will hang that nigger to one of those trees. You know we are right.

Mr. Rosborough sat quietly look strait at Perry. This fellow that was talking so much, I had never seen him before. There was about twenty men in the gathering. Mr. Rosborough spoke with a voice of athority, saying: You listen to what I have to say. I know and you know that a Negro dont have any right of law in the South. Only where some white people support him for justice. We people that beleive in justice do protect them when they are in the right. Ann was in her own rights when she shot you, Perry. You have lied about it all. Jake her husband has been in Texas three weeks.

Perry said: It must have been one of her brothers. A nigger buck shot me as I was passing their house. Mr. Rosborough spoke again, saying: This is a lie. Those two men are on their jobs and wont be off until eight thirty. Now I am asking you to drop this from your minds. There has never been any trouble between Negros and white people here. These Negros that live here they love Sewanee and Sewanee people love them. I warn you if you start any trouble with them you have to face the Military Accadamy bullets and bayonets. And I and many of my coleagues will be on guard.

He said to Perry: You should be ashamed to tell that lie. She chased you today with a hat pin. You are luckey that she didnt kill you.

He rode away from them in haste to our house. When we arrived the house was dark. He called from the gate. Ann answered. He dismounted. We both went in. He talk to Ann, telling her that she would have plenty of protection, that he would be back soon. Cover all windows with quilts, so no one could see any one from a distance.

Then he rode away. Soon he was back with eight other horsemen. They called Ann out to talk to her, telling her they would be patroling the place that night—which they did. There was never any more about it. That is the real Sewanee controled back fifty years ago.

The next week was Commencement Week. The entertainments were numerous dances. Colored people went to see the styles that the ladys from other colledges wore and different dances. It was somthing to see.

I went with Ann one night. It was very cold to stand outside and look in the windows. Most people came in carrages. Some came with oil burning lanterns. That was the only allumination there was in the town.

When the dance started a gentleman came out where we colored were standing on boxes looking through the windows. He told we people to go to the stage intrance, to come in, sit on the stage. I heard one person say: Thank you, Mr. Hodson. We filed in. It was a beautiful sight. Forensic Hall could accomdate two hundred couple at one time.

Ann was much amused. She knew every lady in Sewanee. She would speak like this: Dont Miss Carry and Miss Bessie Kirby Smith look beaitiful? Then Miss Hodson, Cary Tucker, Dora Colmore, Kary Johnson, McCrady. She served almost all of the lady in some way. This was the first time I realized that somthing about me was not fair. That white people just let a Negro go so far, and no farther, although we were a part of them and they were a part of us. But why were we at a handcap? No answer. I had worn the patience out of everybody asking questions.

The next week I left Sewanee for Bridgeport, Alabama, my dog Tepsy and I. All the way on the train I was wondering if I will meet anybody that know me, and know that I am a bastard, or will call me Clabber. Will Uncle Tom be like Grandpa? Wont talk to me, wont allow me to ask question? He is a business man. I hadnt seen a Negro that was a business man. He must be great. I would learn to ride horses, and go to school.

When I come back to Sewanee I will be a man and wont have to take anything off nobody. No one will call me a bastard nor Clabber.

When I arrived Uncle Tom met me. We walk to his house, where Mama was living. Mama hugged me and Tepsy. She was so glad to have us with her. I met the boy name Readie that Uncle Tom was raising. He I knew was a bastard, so I knew we had somthing in common. We could pass for brothers. Both had red curly hair. We were the same size. He was the oldest. We liked each other and became to be pals. He didnt like to talk, never ask about nothing.

Uncle Tom had a nice house of six rooms. He had four teams of mules, two buggy horses and buggys, which he often rent to drummers that want to go to South Pittsburg, five miles away. The stable was a bit dilapedated. He had three men on payroll that hauled freight goods to the stores and coal.

I was given a task that afternoon. Readie and I had to arise at four oclock every morning to feed the stock. I was soon taught how curry the mules. Uncle Tom take a liking to me. He said I was quick to move. The colored really was very nice, too. No one ever called me a bastard.

All went well untill Sunday morning. Uncle Toms sister came by the house going to church. Mama ask her to take me with her. I was made ready. I always went to church on Sunday. I hadnt been to no other than the Episcopal Church. This was Babtist where Aunt Becky was taking me. I had never seen people shout the “Halalua” way.

We went in church. We sat very close up front. We was a little early. Soon a long tall black man with white hair rose from his chair and gave out some words that they sang. Each word sounded like ten words in one. I couldnt take no part in this singing. When it was finished he read from the Bible a verse, then his text. He talk for few minutes, very calm, explaining the Scripture, and then all at once he let out a yell, saying: Whoever believeth in me shall have everlasting life. At this, all over the church people were crying out: Amen. Thank God. I looked about wondering what it is all about.

Soon, Parson was moaning and groaning his words out. He would stomp his foot and come forward with another yell. By this time the hand-slapping and Amens were so loud you couldnt hear what Parson was really saying.

He put his hand to the side, and yelled out: Who is going to be ready when Gable blows the trumpet? Aunt Beckey slambed her pocket book and hat into my lap, and leapt to her feet with a scream, dashing by me into the aisle. Two more sisters done the same thing.

I ran out of the church and went down the road running. When I looked back I saw three boys back of me. I waited for them to catch up. They ask me what was I running away for. I told them I think my auntie had gone crazy. I wanted to get away from them. They told me that these people was happy and was shouting. Come on back, and I would see.

So I went back. I would not go in the church: I waited outside for Aunt Beckey to come out. When she did she was acting like she did before she went in. So on the way home Aunt Beckey told me that this was Negro religion—the only religion that you felt the Holy Spirit moving in your body.

As she explained to me that when the Holy Spirit touches you, you cant be still. You just have to let everybody know it. She also said Episcopals were not Christian. No white people were Christians. They dont know what the Holy Ghost is. You will have to experence it for yourself. You can go with me every time I go.

When I got home I went to Mama Mat. I wanted to know if the white people at Sewanee was all lieing about them being Gods childrens. Aunt Beckey said no white people were Christians. Everybody laughed at me today for running out of church. I didnt know that Negros were the only people that received the Holy Ghost. I sure want this religion.

Here I started to asking Uncle Tom about religion. He soon got tired to trying to answer them. Then he said: White people teach Negros what they want them to know, that will help them to be more service to the white people. Thats why most Negros is willing for them to have all this world. Just give them heaven. When you are that way you are a good nigger and should go to heaven. So dont ask any more about it.

I was determined that if I had to be a Negro I want to be as much like them as I could be. I would go to church and Sunday School. I would be touched by the Holy Ghost and shout like the others.

The next week I began to see more of the colored people. Many men that was out of work hung around the livery stables hoping there would be some chance to do some work for Uncle Tom. This was the first time I had seen a crap game. They would play cards and shoot craps when Uncle Tom was out. When they knew I wouldnt tell about it, seems everybody like me.

I was quite happy, although I did not have any time to play with children nor go to school. Soon Uncle Tom started a junk yard. He taught me to weigh meterial. This I ran almost alone for about six months. He often sent me with the horse and buggy to bring back from South Pittsburg when a drummer rented it.

There was one thing I missed that was so different in the people there and the people at Sewanee: no one wore a collar and tie. Most colored all wore blue overralls. The only ones that wore suits were the preacher, school teacher, and the barber that ran it for white people.

In Sewanee everybody except Grandpa and Bill Smith were always dressed. I had never seen any white man that lived in the corporation on the street without a colar and tie. No students either.

I hadnt seen a white man drunk, untill I came here. There were no coachmans, no colored men driving carraiges where their madams were sitting by them. There wasnt ladies carrying parasoils with ruffles, nor ladies dressed in white suits with their shirtwaists with fluted collars and cuffs.

I use to love to look at them when they taken their evening walk. I always liked to hear them say: Hello, Ely, when I tipped my cap. This I missed very much. The white people in Bridgeport taken no part of the colored people. No colored people ever said anything good about white. They talked as if they hated white people.

I am having a struggle within: trying to get this Negro religion worked out, and learning to hate white people, when I had been taught that we were all Gods children and we are to love everybody. I didnt have any bitter feeling toward any one here. I was never call bastard by any. So I pray to become to be a Christian like the Negro, after months going to prayer meeting, church, hearing the confessing of converts telling of their experence of being borned again, how some white man looked like Christ placed a small stone on their tongue, and the salvation went over them and God told them they had been borned again. Then they would shout untill they sometimes would pass out unconscous.

I prayed and prayed that I would become to be like they were. I become to be so nervous that I would have dreams that the world was coming to an end. I would awaken screaming, leaping out of the bed. I would wake Mama Mat, asking did she hear Gable blowing his trumpet, asking: What can I do? I am a sinner.

Mama sent me talk to Reverend Walker, who was called Parson. She said: You dont have Father Eastern to guide you. So go to Parson. I did. He listen to me, then just said: Son, keep praying. The Holy Ghost is working on you. It works in misterous ways. So keep praying. I did just that. This lasted over a year.

I had not gone to school as was promised. This was in the winter of 1906. This year Readie and I had worked hard. When coal was sold at aptment houses, we had to carry it in scuttles up two and three stories. It taken all day to carry a ton up and dump it in the bins. This we had to do frequently.

I had still in my mind to go to Dr. Townsends school at Winchester. I started to begging to let me go there and live with Aunt Adline and go to school.

There were two brothers by the name Pain. I like them very much. Jonny Pain had just got married to a lady name Annie Sick. All the men kidded him, saying: Pain is Sick, which he did not like to kid with any. In a small cemetery in Bridgeport today are two small tombstones, side by side. The inscription reads Pain and Sick, by Ripley, Beleive it or Not.

As spring came Uncle Tom leased four hundred acres for farm land. He hired men to cultivate it. He gave me ten acres and Readie the same. We could have the money that it brought. This increased our task. We had to be up by three thirty every morning to feed ten head of mules, so they could leave by six oclock for the fields that was two miles away. These men had a contract at one dollar a day to work ten hours in the field, working time, and one meal a day which was at midday, which I had to take to them. I work my crop in the afternoon. I had good luck. I raised punkins and corn which I sold for twenty dollars. This would help me go to Winchester to school. The harvesting was over in October. I went to carrying coal and helping the freight hauling.

Anderson was one of the teamesters for Uncle Tom. He was unloading a barrell of sorgum molasses. It got out of control and rolled against the curbing and bursted. The store keeper who it was intended for became angry and started kicking Anderson. Anderson pick up the end gate and struck the white man across the head. The man fell on the side walk. Many white men came running to where this had happened. Anderson ran toward the colored part of town. The white was yelling: Kill that nigger. I was holding the team as usal. I drove the team to the stable. Anderson had gone home and got his gun, and had told other people about what had happened. He left town.

Soon, ten white men and two bloodhounds came up to the stable. They were going after Anderson. This was the first time I had seen colored people so angry with white people that they cursed and swore at each other. Almost every colored person had a gun. They did not catch Anderson. When the law came back by without Anderson, there was a rejoycing among the colored men for they sat around talking of how they hated white people. I listened, thinking.

One fellow said: I keep my gun always handy. If I ever have trouble with them, they may kill me. I bet Ill take some with me when I go. I thought this was just about the most sensible thing I had heard any of them say. This will be what I will do when I grow up: buy a good gun and learn to use it.

I began to think that these Negros are right. White people are all evil and wrong. They are not Christians at all. I must become to be converted in this Negro religion. I must. I hate white people. They are the cause of me being a bastard. If I ever get back to Father Eastern, I will tell him how wrong his teaching is. They dont know anything about the Holy Ghost. I thought then about my mother being converted when she was near death—how the Spirit had moved her, caused her to be able to shout and clapp her bands. I prayed and prayed that this mirical would happen to me.

I knew that in Winchester colored people were like these here. I would soon be like them, although some people knew I am a bastard. But that wont mean anything when I am like all other Negros, and a Christian like them and can shout. This I kept in mind.

Two weeks later I was told that I could go to Winchester. Thanksgiving had just passed. Uncle Tom gave me a watch—lngesoll was the make—and a chain, bought me a suit of clothes. This was the first time I had worn a new suit of clothes. I had to leave my dog. I regretted that very much as I went all alone.

I got to Winchester at two oclock that afternoon. Aunt Adline met me at the train. She was a little hunch-backed lady, the kind that spoke very few words at any time, a devouted Babtist. After asking how Mama Mat was, there was no conversation. We walk one half mile before reaching her home.

She showed me where I was to sleep. Then she taken her scissors and ript open my pocket that Mama had sewed my money up in. There was eighteen dollars.

I liked her house—only three rooms. She owned a organ. As we were about to have dinner we heard shouts out in the streets. We went out to see what was.

Here was a young girl about sixteen screaming and shouting, yelling: I have been borned again. There was about fifteen people older than her following her home. Aunt Adline ran out and hugged her, saying: God bless her. I stood and looked on with envy: Oh, if I could only be like her to have people loving me like that, and knowing that I am a child of God and could prove it.

We sat down to eat. I was very silent. I was thinking when Adline said: That preacher and his wife has converted a lot of people during this betracted meeting. It will be over tonight. I said: I sure wish I could go. I want to be converted. I had forgotten that Aunt Adline had been in Sewanee working. She said: You were born a Episcopalian. You dont know what you are talking about. If you want to go church tonight, you can go with Virginia. You know her. She worked at the Tucker boarding house. She will be over here soon. She will take you, and you can learn about Methodist religion.

Soon Virgina came. Aunt Adline told her to take me with her. This was Saturday night, the closing night. All evening at Virginias house she seem to look at me as if she was trying to keep from laughing about somthing. Although she was jovial and pleasent she kidded me a bit about wanting to be converted.

When we went in the church the only seats unoccipied were in the back. We were seated. I had never seen a betracted meeting in opperation. The lady preacher opened the service, giving the text: The Eagle Tareth up his Nest. This man and wife was known as the sin-killing pair, traviling through the South saving souls. From Atlanta, Ga. They explained the superiority of the eagle, comparing their traits of training their young with the way God teaches his own to bring them into his fold.

When the sermon was over, Reverant Washinton ask all sinners to stand up. Virginia told me: Stand up. I did. Then he ask every one that wanted to be prayed for, come forward, beckoning with his band. Virginia told me to go to him. This was strange to me. I wasnt sure of what I was doing though I went on.

Just in front of me was a colored woman named Mat Lu Gray that I know in Sewanee. She was a good dancer. She and Ann were friends. I felt much better now.

When we reached the preacher there were many people on their knees that was praying that hadnt been converted from nights before: They moved up another bench. We were told to sit. I sat by Mattie Lu. We were told to kneel and pray. Here was where I was confused. I only knew the Lords Prayer, I began to listen to what Mattie Lu was saying. I would say: Me too, Lord.

Soon there were many people around us singing songs I had never heard, clapping their hands. This went on for hours. Mattie Lu prayed. I kept saying: Me too, Lord. Some time I couldnt hear what she was saying, but I would say: Me too. All at once Mattie Lu jumped up and started shouting. I jumped up and began jumping and watching her, trying to do every thing she was doing, although I didnt scream. Soon they pulled her down. I was still jumping when they led me to a bench, and I sat down.

I looked around for Virginia. She was lying on a bench cracking her sides with laughter. Soon the preacher came to me, asking me: Are you the boy that came through tonight? I ask: Through what? He said then: How do you feel? I said: Alright, only it is too hot in here. The preacher turned away, said no more.

Soon we started for home. It was bitter cold outside. It had snowed. Virginia taken me home with her for the rest of the night, so she could go to Aunt Adline the next morning to tell her about my confession. So when she told her I had confested a religion she was still laughing. Aunt Adline said: This boy dont know anything about no religion. So my confesion was over.

That morning many people came to congratulate me. Auntie would tell them I didnt know what I was doing. This caused a lot of argument. Some said that Aunt Adline didnt want to admitt my confession because I was converted in a Methodest church. This all became disgusting and shameful. The next morning I ask Aunt Adline to let me go to Sewanee. I have made you so unhappy with your friends. I want to go and talk to Father Eastern. Then I will come back later. First she refused, telling me she had a job for she and I where I would be given my meals and fifty cents a week and go to school. She would get two dollars and a half a week cooking at the Nortons boarding house.

I pleaded to let me go. I just had to go. Nobody understands like Father Eastern and Farther Gerry. We were standing by the window looking at the snow covered field. I said: I bate white people like all Negros. But I need to talk to Farther. She look at me for a moment, then said: Perhaps it will be best for you. Dont ever say you hate white people. They are not all bad. My best friends are white people. All colored people that are any good have some white friends.

The next morning I left Winchester at eleven oclock, arrived in Sewanee at five oclock that afternoon. I went to my stepfarthers house. He was home. My little brother had grown a lot since I was gone. They were all glad to see me. My stepfather wanted to know what happened to me that I came alone. I told him I came here to see Father Eastern. I just want to talk to him. He said: He has ask me many times about you and what you were doing.

It was almost dark by this time. I told him I was going to Father Easterns house. I will be back soon. I left. I had to walk a half mile into the corporation. When I knocked on his door he opened it. He seemed to be so glad to see me. He spoke so kindly, saying: How have you been? Why didnt you write me? You have grown a lot. Its been over two years since you left here.

There was somthing of interest in his talk, that I realized I hadnt felt since I had seen him last. Then he said: Did you go to school? I told him: No. He said: Why not? Then I said: Father, I had to come to you because I have to tell you how you people are so wrong, and how wrong you have taught me about religion.

Father was sipping a cup of tea, He set the cup down, missing the saucer. Looking strait at me he said: What are you trying to say, Ely? He stop for me to answer.

Then I stood to my feet. I said: Father, You people have these schools and big buildings here in Sewanee. Call yourselves teaching Cristyanity, and you dont know what the Holy Ghost is. You people are not Christian. You dont know nothing about religion like the Negros. They have a religion that the Holy Ghost makes them shout untill they pass out. They talk with God. He touches with Salvation and the Holy Ghost. I have heard them say that God has told them that they have been borned again. I have been so disapointed because I could not get this religion. Many has said I was too much like you white people. At night sometimes I cant sleep for dreaming that the world is coming to an end, and I am a sinner, they say. All Negros hate white people. I am the same way. I just wanted to come and tell you I made a fool of myself at Winchester, trying to be like them and their Negro religion. I was to go to school there. After making such a fool of myself I just couldnt stay there any longer. I just had to come and talk with you.

Father finished sipping his tea. For the first time I ever seen him smiling before he started to talk to me as he did just here. He rose from the desk, then sat in his big chair by the fire. He said: Ely, I am glad you came to me at this time. You are turning fifteen years old. You I realize understand so much better about many things. Now I can talk to you with much more ease than before. First, I will explain to you about Negro religion, which you will never be able to understand. First, I will say you have everything all wrong as I will prove it to you. Now we will talk about you. This is why it is hard to you to understand the Negros. You are somewhat like a man building a building. Try to start at the top instead of the bottom. That is the way you have started out. You would not go to school which is the basic training. You have been about a cultured class of people, and for that reason you have skipped the primary part of training which you have been involved in. So now I can explain to you better than I could for you to understand. Now I am glad you came. This religion of the Negro and singing that you dont understand, this is why. The Negros are still very much instenctive. It is native nature for them to sing doleful tunes and be demonestrative and emontional. Like almost all natives they all have some native trait of songs that to them has somewhat a stimilating or hypnotic efect, that causes them to exert themselves into exortion. Say the Indian, for instance. They would sing and dance all night to drown out fear of dying the next day in battle. I dont condem no religion, but I dont agree that all religions are really of true Christanity. The Negro learned his teaching of God from the white people. They have annexed much of their native habit of hypnotic rythm in it. That was so helpful during slavery. They could magnafiy their thoughts untill they believe almost anything they wish would come to be. That was wonderful. It gave them hope, which is great. These dreams you had was caused by your anxiety and believing that you would be like them. Ely, I will say to you this was what is called taxation of mind. I havent ever heard of any man or woman that has seen God or even talk to him since Christ. No one knows there is a God. We can only beleive as you and I. Negros do not hate white people. Some may say they do. It cant be true, because how could they live without their white friends? So dont ever say you hate anybody. I want you join the choir at our church. Forget all about your experince you had. You see why you will never be able to understand somthing that really is not what you hear about. There are many religions and teachings of religions. Most people are demonistrative as to their intelligence. That is why many people like us dont display our feelings. Now do you understand? All of us is Gods children. Our task is to love everybody. This is all Gods world.

Just then the clock of Breslin Tower was striking nine oclock. Father said: Come see me often. He walked to the door with me, saying: Good nite.

As I started to walk back to my stepfathers house it was cold. I didnt feel as I did before I went to see Father Eastern. I only felt sorry for anybody that was a Negro. My mind went back to the day when I was first called a nigger. Here I decided I would never be a Negro. I would not be somebody that people were sorry for. I will be a man in the eyes of man and God. From that very night I refused to answer to the word Negro. As I walked along I found I was glad to be back in Sewanee. I didnt even think of being a bastard which I knew I would be called. Then I decided I am a big boy now. I dont have to take anything I dont want to. I can fight my way if I have to. When I reach home my stepfather was still up waiting for me to come in. He talked with me about Alabama, and about me going to see Father Eastern. He hadnt been out of Sewanee in twenty years. He was an Episcopalian and didnt know anything about other denomunations. I tried to tell him about how people lived and acted in Alabama. He was like Grandpa in some ways, only he was most…He was elitorate, could not write his own name.

He told me Grandpa had married since I left—a young girl seventeen years old—and they had a baby girl. He said: He will kill hogs tomorrow. We will go and help him. He will kill over twenty. The old man is doing good, as tough as times are. This panic thats on makes things mighty tuff. I hadnt heard much about there being a panic.

I went to see Grandpa the next morning. He was glad to see me. He and his wife ask me wouldnt I like to live with them. I told them yes, untill Mama Mat came back to Sewanee.

Grandpa said my job today was to keep the kitties boiling so there would be lots of hot water to scald the hogs. Men were making ready to start killing. I loved to be around hog-killing. I liked to broil the melts over the blaze and eat them. Many people came. He always had the bigest killing of anybody in the town. Everyone that came he gave them parcels of meat to take home.

When the work was over Grandpa payed everybody in cash. This no one expected, because script was being used. There he was praised highly. I thought much about what he had told me about—when you got money you are sombody. He is today even if he is a Negro.

He brought out a gallon of whiskey. Only the men drank. They helpt him load twelve hogs on the wagon. He taken to market. That was all he could sell. The butcher didnt need any more. He was unhappy with himself for not killing before Thanksgiving. He said: Most everybody is leaving here next week. School is out.

He also had to accept a due bill of script instead of money. This caused him to boast, which I liked to hear him say: Old Ned has got his own money. No banker cant tell me when I can have my money. You just be like me, boy.

He had ten hogs to cure. So I had to keep the fire burning for rendering lard and condement dip for curing smoke meat and grinding sausage. This lasted for three weeks. The smell of grease became almost sickening. We saved all the meat so it could be sold by pieces.

Every day Grandpa was teaching me to milk. He had twelve milk cows. I had to milk the three with small tits. He was more kinder to me than he had been. Always when he had completed a job of some kind he would go on a bender.

All the meat was either in the salt bins or in the smoke house. The next day we sawed wood and piled it outside of the house—enough for three or four days supply. He checked the food for the stock. He rode away the next morning, not telling anyone where he was going. When he came back he had two jugs of whiskey that he put in the feed bin at the barn. That evening, while he went to deliver milk, Eva, his wife, told me that she thought that he was going on a drunk. So we will have to look after things for him.

Everything was so much different than before. The house was clean. Everything was clean. He didnt sit on the floor to eat off the hearth like he did before he married. He still ate his possums. The bed ticks wasnt leaves or straw like they used to be—we had feather ticks to sleep on. I was enjoying living with them. Eva was a good house keeper. That night at dinner Eva began begging him not to drink so much. He boasted a bit how he could take care of himself and all of us.

I had to laugh when he said he was a money man. He wanted all his children from now on named after money. It is power. He had one daughter by his second wife named Goldie. This daughter we have, Eva, is named Silverine. The next one you have I will name her Greenback. Thats our job—getting Greenback. We all giggled. Soon we went to bed.

The next morning it was bitter cold. When we finished milking Grandpa told me he wanted me to go with him to Mrs. Emma Tuckers house which he looked after when they went away for the winter. I did not have a overcoat. Eva, his wife, gave me a blanket to wrap up in. On the way he told me that we must examine every window, water pitcher, slop jar to see that there was no water left in them. The people all left a week ago. He had been so busy curing meat that he hadnt had time to look after the house. He said: There is around eighteen rooms. You can go up and down the steps faster than I. I hope that it hasnt been cold enough to freeze water inside untill now. We found many containers with water in them just like the students had left them. Nothing had frozened. We covered some furniture and left.

He said: I think I should go and see Ada. This was his oldest daughter that had been living in Tulaboma and had moved to Sewanee while I was in Alabama. Mother Richerson, my Godmother, had hired her to work like my mother had worked. She had a daughter one month older than I. I hadnt seen much of them after my mother died.

Aunt Ada was very fond of me. I did not realize it untill that day when she said: You must come with me to see Mother Richinson. She asks about you often. She is getting very old and feeble, and Dr. cant hardly walk. We went in to the living room. There she sat tatting threads just like I had always seen her when I was a small boy. Polly, her parrot, began saying: Polly wants a cracker. Aunt said: Mother, I have someone that come to see you.

By this time I had walk beside her, saying: How are you, Mother? Her eyes were not too good. She look around and said: Why havent you been to see me before now? Do you remember that I am your Godmother? Its been four years since you been to see me. You have grown much. You are a fine looking boy. Mat is doing a fine job raising you. She is a fine woman. She said: I have heard that you dont like school. You could read when you were five, and write. Do you remember the slate you got for Xmas? Everything you wrote for a while was all capital letters. Your mother Lena said from your first writing that it look like a sign painters work. Too bad you dont like school. I was so glad that she didnt aske me why I didnt like to go to school.

Just then Dr. Richison came crippling in assisted by his cane. He used some profanity almost every word he spoke. As he hobbled in the doorway, he said: What the hell is all the talk about, Mary?—talking to Mother Richison. She answered, saying: Your little boy has come to see us.

He had come closer to where we were. He was very near-sighted, had been for years. He looked and saw who I was, then said: You dam little scamper. Have you forgot how you use to come to the back door of the store and beg for lemon drop and marshmollows? On the table by which he was standing there was a box of candy. He tossed a bar of chocholate at me, which I caught.

Then he ask me how did I like Alabama. I told him I did not like any part of it, because the people were not like Sewanee: Everybody is so kind, especialy white people. They dont dress like Sewanee people. They dont wear collars and ties. They dont have servants like you people here. Dr. gave a grunt, then said: What do that class of sagers know about servants? They are too listless like these around here to get out of the rain. Thats why they dont have anything to do here, dam them.

Mother said: Ely, have you been to see Father Gerry? I said: No, I had seen Father Eastern. Then she said: We are going to lose Father Gerry soon. He is going to South Carilina to become to be Bishop. We are so sorry that we have to lose him. He has presided at St. Agustus so long.

Then she said: Ely, you must go to school. When Bishop Gailor comes here Easter I am going to see if he cant have you go to St Marys School at Nashville. You can help work your way through. I have heard that you are smart and like to work. Lena, your mother, was all set on you being educated. She was an unusal colored girl. She was like my own. She started you so young to learn to read and write. You were her pride and joy. I want to help you and there are other people that will help you.

Then she said to my aunt Ada: There is a bundel of clothes in the cellar for Ely that Mrs. Susie Huntington sent for him—some of Ellery, her oldest boys, clothes. Give them to him. As she sat there by the window as she had for many years, my thought went back when my mother and she was so close.

The wind was blowing the sleet against the panes. So cold outside. This warmness of real friendship within could never be forgoten by a small black boy. I knelt and kissed her hand as it rested on the arm of her wheelchair. She turned her face to the window as I said goodbye.

When we got to the servant quarters Aunties husband and Grandpa was much pepped up from their drinks. Grandpa was full of boast. He was very proud that he had a wife thirteen years younger than his oldest daughter. I unrolled the package. There was many things I needed, above all an overcoat which I had never owned. This was a day I could never forget.

We left for home. The wind was high. The sleet had stopped. Grandpa didnt pay any attention to the cold. I got very cold before we got home. Grandpa only mumbled to himself now and then. I thought he would fall off the wagon. He would lean over so far and then straiten up again. When we got home he drove the horse under the shed. He dont unhitch him. It wont be long before I will have to take milk to four people after we milk, he said.

When we went in the house Eva, Grandpas wife, had dinner ready. What a dinner: backbones, cabbage, crackling cornbread, peach cobler, buttermilk! When we finished we were almost foundered. While we were eating the wind had lowered. It had started to snow. By time we had finished milking the ground was covered white. After measuring the milk Grandpa desided he would use the sulky to deliver the milk. It would be lighter for the horse to pull in the snow. He drove away. I went to the house wondering why he wanted to take the jug of whiskey with him. Eva, his wife, didnt have anything to say to me for a while. I got busy carving a figure—four trigger for a bird trap. About two hours passed. She stood looking out at the snow. She said: That old girl is sure picking geese this evening. What a snow! She said: Ely, I think your grandfather is going on a drunk. If he does, you and I will have to look after things for him. He does that about every three months. It last about two days. Then he is alright for another three months.

She walked to the window, looked out, saying: He is back. I see the horse at the gate. We waited for a half hour. No one came in. She said: Go to the barn and see whats keeping him. I went. Grandpa was nowhere to be found. I went back and told her he wasnt out there. I ask did she think he might have fallen off the sulky. Then she said: Take the horse, lead him on the trail through the woods. If he fell off he will be lying in the road if he is hurt. I would go with you but I cant leave the baby, not for long.

I started through the woods. The snow was almost blinding, though the trees on each side of the trail guided well. Just as we reached the brook I stopted. I do get in the sulky to ride across the stream. The horse would not move toward the stream. He just balked. I got out to lead him. Again he refused to move. I started to walk to the stream. Then I stumbled over Grandpa covered in the snow.

I rolled him over, brushed the snow off of him. He was breathing, although he was out of undestanding, didnt say a word. He was limp as a rag. I wondered what could I do to get him home. I couldnt lift him into the sulky. He will freeze if he is left for long.

Then I thought about in Bridgeport Uncle Tom hauled all dead stock to the bone-yard. When snow was on the ground we would drag them. Anything would drag easy in snow as deep as this is. I turned the horse around and backed the sulky over Grandpa. I taken the reins off the horse and tied ,Grandpa to the axel of the sulky. It was hard to raise him enough to get the reins under him and around his body and under his shoulders. I finally got him to a sitting position to tie him. Then I led the horse up the trail home.

Eva and I drug him into the house. She made a pallet of a thick comfort in front of the fireplace, and let him lie there untill he sobered up. Eva was angry. She didnt talk at all. I made two figure—four trap triggers to catch snow birds with.

At one clock Grandpa got up and drank two dippers of water. No one spoke. I went to the kitchen and went to bed.

The next morning Grandpa called me to go and milk. This was somthing I was getting tired of. My hands got so cold. At breakfast Eva told him how I went and got out of the snow, and he should be ashamed to have to have his grandson bring him home drunk. She threatend to leave him if he ever done this again. I left them quarreling. I went to set some traps for birds.

When I came back, as I came in the door, I heard him say: Yes, I will buy you that chum, the one you can rock with your foot. And is there anything else you need from town? Eva said: No. She said: I want seventy five cents tommorow. That lady that comes from Tulahomma that straitens hair will be here in Sewanee. I want to have my hair straitened. And I want a dollar to buy a comb, twenty five cents for a box of grease. Ely can stay with the baby while I am gone.

Grandpa said his pet word: Got ding, woman, are you trying to break me? He said: When you live in Beans Creek you didnt know what hair straitening, combs, and grease was. Eva threw the dish at him she was holding in her hand. Out the door he went, calling me to come on. As I caught up with him, he mumbled out: You can believe in the Communion of Saints but not the Riserection. We hitched up the team and started to town. I finally had to ask him why didnt he beleive in the Reserection. That is when I am going to see my mama again. I ask: Dont you want to be in the Riserection?

He said: Boy, I want you to be a man like me. You talk like these white people here in Sewanee. Thats whats wrong with Eva. Everybody comes to Sewanee gets all high collarded. She wants to spend two dollars for her hair. She is as pretty as a peach like she is. Two dollars is a weeks pay for some people.

This I thought was my first lesson about woman when he said: I will have to give it to her, because this thing about woman is you cant hardly live with and Got ding cant live without them. Thats why the scripture say: A man born of a woman is only in this world a few days and his heart is filled with trouble. That is true. I mean trouble. When you are grown dont let no woman boss you. Be like me.

We stopped in front of Fischer Hardware Store. He went in. I stayed on the wagon to hold the horses. He stayed so long I got cold. I hitched the team to the post and went in. He and Mr. Fischer were at the back end of the store where the stove was. Grandpa was boasting as usal. He was telling him about me. What a fine son he had. How I had found him in the snow, that he was hurt by falling from the sulky, and how I brought him home. And he was going to take me from Mattie Davis, that I was his flesh and blood. That he would fight a law suit up to five hundred dollars to get me.

I had come in quietly. No one heard me. I stood back and listen. When he finished talking he ask Mr. Fischer didnt he think he was right to take him. Then he added: He figures my books. He told me how much I owed you to a tee.

Mr. Fischer said: Ned, I cant say that you are exactly right. You know everybody know that Mat taken him when he was a small boy when no one wanted him. Now he is large enough to be of help. Hes about fifteen years old. She has done a fine job withe him. He was in here about a month ago when he came back. He deposit fifty cents on a air gun, and said he would pay along as he made money. He could have taken the gun if he had ask, because several of the corporation white people has told me to let him have anything he wanted that a boy should have. He is a curtious litle fellow and a fine looking chap. I think you will have trouble trying to take him from her.

They came to the front of the store. I was leaning on the counter looking up at the air guns in the rack behind the counter. Mr. Fischer said: Hello. I bowed to him. Grandpa picked up part of the churn and told me to bring the rack it set in and the rocker. We had got on the wagon when Mr. Fischer came out of the store with the gun in his hand. He said: Wait, Ned. He handed me the gun and bag with shots in it, saying: You owe me a dollar and a half. You can pay when you get it. I could have shouted. I wanted this gun so bad. I thanked him. He looked as if he really enjoyed letting me have this gun. He smiled and said goodbye.

Grandpa drove all the way home, not saying anything to me direct. Mumbled once or twice. I knew he was not happy. I was so happy mostley because to think that somebody thought somthing of me. Hearing what Grandpa told Mr. Fischer that I had saved his life, I for the first time came to really love him. He had not all day told me to shut up. And I have a gun. My hands were cold holding the gun, but I just couldnt lay it down. Just to think it was mine. When Tepsy my dog came from Alabama we will hunt. I wont have no babies to care for. I am a big boy now.

Eva was happy to get her rocker churn. When she saw my gun, she said: Did Ned buy it for you? I told her I got it on credit. Why didnt you pay for it? You had forteen dollar when you came to Sewanee. What did you do with it? I told her that money was to go to school on. I canot use it. I helpt her wash and set up the churn.

Grandpa was busy out in the smoke house. When he came in Eva was sitting holding Silverene her baby in her lap, rocking the churn with her foot. He had a basket full of dried leaves and roots which he said they were herbs. He stood looking at Eva operating the churn with her foot.

She said to him: Mr. Berry was here and said if you wanted to ship some butter with him to Nashville you could. That the creamery would pay fifteen cents a pound, and wont pay the express on less than twenty pounds. She said: You see, we have so much milk on hand. Its a shame to have to feed it to the hogs and chickens. We have fourteen gallons every day and for the next two months you only sell three gallon a day. I can make butter out of all of it much easier with this churn.

Grandpa said: Got ding if you aint the smartest gal in Sewanee. I am going to give you money for that hair grease. He went to the trunk in the corner of the room, reached in the trunk and got a hand full of silver money. He came to the back of her chair placeing one hand on her shoulder, bent down and kissed her on her neck. Then nudged the baby in the stomach lightly. He was smiling looking at them. I hadnt ever seen him in this humor before.

He gave her two dollars for her hair. Then he said: You can have all the money that you get off the butter. When those Jew pack peddlers come by you can buy that silk dress that cost ten dollars. I want you to have what you want. Only I dont want you to get so high up on the hog that some of the high collard niggers will take you away from me.

She look up into his face and say: Ned, you are all I want. He ruffed his band in her hair, picking up his basket and going to the kitchen. Eight months later she left him. I often wondered if he knew it would happen. I thought it many times.

When Grandpa left the room I went out to see if I had birds in the trap I set that morning. I found all four traps down. One box had two birds, the others had one each. I knew where there was an old parrot cage that Grandpa had brought home, saved out of rubish he had hauled. I taken the birds out alive and put them in it. I went in the house to show them to Eva, wanting to know if this was enough to make a pie.

Grandpa said: No, dont cook them. I want them to bait traps with. A coon will go through hell to get a bird and a possum will too. Foxes too. I am going to teach you how to trap. I have to go into the mountains soon as this snow melts to get herbs. I have to make up some herbs for many people. The herbs I have are too dry. I will go to my herbs beds and dig fresh ones. I want to teach you about herbs. Old Ned has to do a lot of things to help people.

Eva said: Ned, that girl was here to see while you were gone, poor thing. She said please do somthing for her. He stood gazeing in the fire for a minute, then said: Got ding these fool gals let these high collard niggers mess them up. Then they come to me asking me to keep them from having a baby. I have helped some. I am good with herbs. But I dont like that kind of business. Ill try to help her, because I do hate to see bastards born.

While he was silent I was thinking nearly all of my family was bastard. Maybe thats why that Grandpa didnt be around us any more then he was. He take the herbs and my birds and went to the smoke house. Eva said: He is a good man and smart, only if he didnt drink. If he would just try to be happy. You have been lots of help since you come. You are going to stay with Mat, arnt you? I told her that I belong to Mama Mat. She needs me. She is suffering badly with rhematisim.

Eva said: Lee, your stepfather, has a letter for you. They read it. Mat will be here the first week in February. She will have Charlott Streeter to live with her. I dont want Ned to know it yet. He is so set on taking you from her. I dont think it is right. You are the finest boy I ever knew. You are so much company. But she needs you more than Ned does.

Grandpa came in with four steel traps—two large ones, two small ones. He explained to me that coons and foxes was hard to catch. With a live bird it is a cinch you will catch him. Possum can be caught with anything.

He said: If its not too cold tonight we will go possum hunting to give Heck and Dan, his two dogs, a workout. We milked. I went with him to deliver milk. He hum a tune almost all the time. On the way back there was the old lamp-lighter lighting the oil lamps at every corner. Grandpa called to him and stopped the wagon. The old white fellow came to the wagon, saying: Ned, everybody leaves Sewanee. Seems but you and me stay to keep it together. I hadnt seen him for eight years. I used to follow him around in the summer evening watching him fill the lamps. He spoke to me, saying: You are some boy now. He said: He used to keep me company when he was small. I will be seeing you.

We drove on. Grandpa said: Hes got some job keeping lights burning. No Negro could have a job that lazy. He is a good man. When he dies they will give him a big funeral. But when I die that will be the end of just a good nigger. White people has the Got dingest ways. I said nothing because I have so many things I want to ask Grandpa when we go herb hunting.

When we finished supper we left for Disroom Hollow a mile from home. The dogs treed two possums on the way to the hollow. Grandpa carried a ax, told me to bring my air gun. Good we did. Just as we entered the holler the dogs picked up a trail. Five hundred yards ahead they treed a coon. He was up a big black gum tree. We could not climb it.

He found a rotten log. He got some punk that was dry and would burn. With this we built a fire so bright we could see the coon stretched on a limb. He told me to try to hit him with the air gun. I shot four times before I hit him. It frighten him. He ran out to the end of the limb and leapt off, landing in the water. The dogs went in after him.

We rush to the bank with our lantern to see the coon drowning the dogs. The water was about three feet deep, fifteen feet across it. Grandpa pulled off his overcoat, jumped in the water, grabbed the coon by the tail, started swinging it around over his head, untill he got to the edge of the water and slambed the coon to the ground. The dogs got him. They had a tough fight killing the coon. He was big, weighing twenty two pounds. He said that was the largest coon he had killed. This was a valuable experience for me because I had to do the same thing several times in the four years when I was trapping and hunting for a living.

As we walked back home he talked much telling me that a man has to learn to protect everything he owns.

I ask if he wasnt afraid that the coon would bite him. He said: No. A man that thinks know that he must move faster and can move faster than an animal. He can always beat anything when he is not afraid of it. I am not afraid of anything. I want you to be the same way. Being brave is a mans job. Remember that.

When we got home we put the possum in a barrel. Grandpa skinned him that night. He gave me the skin. I tanned it and had a cap made out of it. I wore it for four years.

Two days later we went to dig herbs. We taken the birds in the cage, the traps and a grubbing hoe. We went below Morgan Steep down the first bench of the mountain where the soil was rich. Looking up, he told me about General Morgan had jumped off that rock. His horse was killed. The general got away. He said: The Yankees almost caught him. He and his bush whackers gave them yankees hell around these canyons. That rock is named after him. Any man can do a Got ding jump aint afraid of nothing. It takes brave men to live and do the right thing at the right time. He said: This is a good time to dig herbs. I have been getting my herbs here for thirty year. I always take some and leave some to grow more. This you must learn—not to destroy the growth of anything. You can make a living in the mountains if you will learn the value of its gifts.

I was so glad to hear him say that because I had this thought in my mind. I had always felt free and there was somthing friendly about the mountains.

He raked the leaves back in a few strokes with the hoe. There were some white roots. He smiled and said to me: These are fine. Breaking a piece off, giving it to me, he said: Chew it. He chewed a piece. It was so bitter I spit it out. He laughed, then said: You can learn what all herbs taste like, then you know them. That is quinine root. Over there is calamus root, catnip, horehound, sasfras. We colected leaves from the catnip and horehound, putting each in flour sack. He said: Over there under the grapevine is a mysterious herb. The Indians believed in it. White people call it ginseng. It is great medicine, good for anything you suffer with. It sells for seven dollars a pound. You see these mountains is full of this kind of stuff. Everybody around here is too lazy to get it.

We went under the grapevines. There was a lot of dried stalk shaped like the letter Y. He said: This stalk is ginseng. When it is green it has a red flower. It is forked and it dont grown in the sunshine. It has to grow in the shade of somthing.

Then he dug up the stalks, taking the larger root, placing the smaller one back in the ground. The roots were shaped like human limbs. He stood holding a root looking like a leg. He said: That is good for any leg ailment. We had collected seven different herbs. He gave me the hoe. He carried the herbs.

I had wondered why he brought a jug with him. We walk around to a rocky cliff. There was a tiny stream flowing, about an inch wide with a yellow streak in the bottom of it. He dug a hole large enough to sink the jug in, then said: We will have to wait a while for the jug to fill. This is chalybeate water. Its call mineral water. It sells fifty cents a gallon in the summer at the hotels. I use it in my herb teas.

While the jug was filling we walked around to the waterfall. I didnt know it was there. He was looking for somthing in the stream. I stood looking at the hole of water, knowing that nothing could keep me away from this place this summer. I was happy to think I can make a living in the mountains all on my own. Grandpa has taught me somthing that I will surley do.

He called me to come to him down the stream where there was a bit of sand. He stooped down looking. He said: What kind of track is that there? I looked and said: How could a baby that small come down here? He laughed, than said: Thats the track of a big coon. It do look like a babys foot.

We went back to the jug. It was full as he told me: This water dont drop like other water. It ropes like oil. We went up to the wagon on top. He stood for a minute looking down the canyon.

Then he drove back toward the corporation, saying: We have to go to the side of the mountain to Shakerag Holler. There is more coons and possum than you can shake a stick at.

He told me on the way that the mountains were full of berrys and nuts that could sell if people would gather them. If you will only learn where they are. You will have work to get them. The trouble with these niggers is they are too afraid to get out of town.

When we got to Shakerag Hollow we went down to the stream. There was lots of coon tracks. Grandpa had clipped the wings of the bird. He tied the feet of the birds to limbs so they could only stand on it, and set the traps under the limbs. We went home. I was studying everything he had done. That night grandpa washed and scraped herbs, stewing some. All evening he didnt talk at all.

Next morning we finished milking. He saddled the horse. I rode back of him. Every trap had caught: two possums, two coons. The birds were gone. He put the coons and possums in a sack after he killed them. He said: This is all the game I can use so we will take the traps in.

We climbed to the top of the canyon where the horse was tied. We scented what Grandpa called a polecat. I ask what did it look like. He said: He is a good thing to keep away from. Hes no good for man nor beast. I had no idea that the polecat would be my most profitable game in the future.

He was in good spirit that day. He said: You know I have two sons and two daughters. I cant explain this. I dont ever remember him calling me Ely. He didnt like me to call him Grandpa. I had to call him Papa. I suppose it was because I carried his name, Green. I didnt carry my white family name. He as far back as I could remember called me Red Horse. My little brother was dark. He called him Black Horse, as if we were a team. My brother always called him Grandpa, but not me nor Adline, Aunt Adas daughter. She was a bastard. She had to call him Papa.

As we rode through the woods he was humming a bit. He said: Red Horse, you know Mat is coming to Sewanee next week. I cant keep you with me unless you dont want to stay with her. I will miss you. We have had a lot of fun. That is somthing I dont have much of. My wife told me last night that Mats youngest son has got married. She is going to live with him in a house out by the graveyard. I said nothing.

As we came into the road, he ask: Do you want to live with her? I said: Yes, Papa, she needs me. He said: Times is hard with this panic on. She wont find it easy to live like it has been. These white people are not helping the nigger like they have been. I said: They will help us, Papa. I know Father Gerry will.

He said: They are having a hell of a time taking care of themselves. He said: I got to stop at Jack Princes house for a few minutes. I want him to come and look at one of my cows. She wont eat. Prince was somewhat a vetinarian, a bounty hunter, and often a depituy. I had seen him many times. We stopped in front of his house. Grandpa went in the gate. Jack Prince came to the door. He yelled at Grandpa, saying: You old polecat. What are you doing over here? Come on in.

I waited on the horse. Soon a boy drove up with a yoke of oxens with a load of wood, yelling: Gee, ha. He was about two years older than I. He stopped in front of the house and began unloading the wood. He said: Aint that horse old Neds? I said: Yes. Who are you? He said: I am Henry Prince. Jack is my dady. I guess Ned stoped to beg a drink. He and Pa is big chums. Pa looks after his stock.

When he finished unloading he said: Come on in. Ned will be here for a while. I went in with him. I liked him, the way he acted so sure of himself, talking like he was a man. Jack and Grandpa was having a nip, sitting in front of the fireplace.

Mrs. Prince came to the door of the kitchen. She looked at me, asking: Henry, who is the boy? Henry said: He is old Neds grandson. She said: You boys come in the kitchen and get some food. I at first refused. She said: Wouldnt you like some ginger bread and sasfras tea? I couldnt refuse that.

I just couldnt stop looking at her. She was pretty, her black eyes, black hair, dark complexion, and so very kind. Not like the other sager class women. There were many guns around the house. I looked at them.

When I looked at Jack and Grandpa, they were looking at me. Jack was smiling. Grandpa said: Jack, that boy is going to be just like me. Hes going to be a mountain man. I am teaching him to know all about herbs and how to trap. Jack said: He couldnt have a better teacher. He said: Ned, I dont believe there is anything that you cant catch. When are you going to bring me a coon? Grandpa said: It is out there on the horse. They went out to get the coon.

I rushed ahead and pulled the sack off the horse and untied it, dumping the coons and possums out. Jack taken the smallest coon.

I said to Mr. Prince: We killed a coon the other night weighed twenty two pounds. He liked to have drowned the dogs. Grandpa told the story how he had to go in the water and throw the coon out. He said: Red Hoss is still thinking about it. Jack said: What this old polecat dont know I will teach you—to shoot. A mountain man must be a good shot. Aint that right, Ned? Grandpa said: Yes, he is gun crazy. Jack slapped Grandpa on his back and said: I will be at your house at four oclock to look at that heifer. We started for home.

I ask Grandpa: Why did Jack have so many guns? He started telling me that he was often made a depety of law when any of these mountaineres got bad and kill sombody, and there was a price on the head. Jack goes and gets him only when its dead or alive. He is a tough mountain man, the best shot any where around.

Grandpa said: He has had gun battles many times. He has got men that the Sherif didnt want to tackle. I cant call him a sager like the rest of these poor white trash. He is betwix and between the sager and the high-up white people. He is one of my best friends and all man.

As we rode on I was thinking: They didnt say Negro neither bastard at any time. This man I must take as a friend. He will teach me how to shoot. That is what I want to learn most of all, so I wont have to take nothing off of anybody. I will work and buy the best gun that can be bought.

Jack came as he promised. He examined the cow. They gave her a drench. When they finished, I got my air gun. I ask Mr. Prince to tell me how I should shoot. He said: There are many things to learn about shooting. First you must learn to bead a target. This he showed me. He said: You dont pull the trigger when beading. You squeeze the shot off. When you get good at that I will teach you more—like shooting quickly from the hip. He said: By the time you are seventeen you should be good. Your nerves are very good. And you are quick. It takes that to be a hunter, man or animal. He got on his horse, saying: You are welcom at my house any time, and rode away.

I stood looking after him, wondering why he called Grandpa a polecat. He was a fine man. He invited me to his home. I will make him my friend. Everything I wanted to do and know was here for me. I was happier now than I had ever been.

Mama Mat will be here in the next three days, and she will bring Tepsy my dog. Now I have a gun and a dog all of my own. I will soon have a gun I can kill game with.

I went to the house. Grandpa was scalding the possums to clean them. I watched him scrape the hair off, and how white they became. I just couldnt eat them. They looked too much like a cat. When he finished cleaning them he put them in a flour sack and bent a sapling over and tied them on it and let it go back up. He would let them stay there for many days before he would eat them.

While we were eating supper Grandpa said to his wife: I am having a telephone put in. I am the only nigger in Sewanee that will have a phone. The number is nineteen. So when the white people want me they can call me on my phone.

When we finished supper he started to chopping up the herbs. I went to bed early. I was tired. I knew the next morning we would saw wood and rack it outside of the house for the next cold spell. Eva, Grandpas wife, was gazeing in a small mirror, looking at her straitened hair. She had carried this mirror constantly for the last few days. She said: Ned, we have thirty pounds of butter, and you havent said one word about my hair. I want a big looking-glass in the house. All I can see in this one is my eyes. Grandpa kinder grunted and said: I had better do that before you get that one moulded in some butter. You look at yourself every fifteen minutes since you got strait hair. I left them sitting before the fire. He was chopping herbs.

The next morning. I was awaken early. We milked the cows. Then while we were sawing wood a man drove up. He was tall and old and black. His hair was white and he had a high hat on. He was driving a flea-bitten gray mare and a small spring wagon.

Grandpa said: Hello, Parson. I havent seen you since you married Eva and I two years ago. You must have left Beans Creek before day to be here this early. Parson said: Yes, it takes time to drive nine miles and climb the mountian too. We stopped and went in the house with Parson.

Parson said: I came up here to give my blessing to you all and the baby. Parson said: Lets pray. We got to our knees. Parson moaned and prayed for at least ten minutes. After he was finished Eva said: Ned, kill two chickens. Parson is hungry. I will cook right away. He likes chicken.

While they were arranging dinner I got my air gun and went out to practice. Later Eva called me to come in. The food was on the table—fried chicken, hot buiscuits, peach preserves, fried sweet potatoes. Parson blessed the table with another prayer. While eating Parson asked Ned who was I. This was the first time I heard Grandpa say I was his grandson. Thats what he told him. Parson said: Bring him when you all come down to meeting. In May we will have a big time at the foot washing. That boy needs to be put in the right pathe now. You know, Brother Ned, I am very much a lover of King Solomon. He said: Train a tree when it is a sprout. So dont spare the rod on no child. Parson was still eating after we were finished. He didnt stop untill he had ate everything on the table. Grandpa said: No, I wont bring him. He is a Episcopalian and a good boy. I dont have to use the rod on him.

Parson grunted and started to talk about how hard times were and the panic, that he was compelled to lean on the strong arm of his brothers. Colections were low. No one had any money. I came to you because some donation—anything you can spare—I will be gracious to have. I know you have plenty. Thats was why I was so glad to see this gal marry you. You are a smart man and a good Christian. This was the first time I had heard anybody call Grandpa a Christian. Eva said: Sure, Parson, we will help.

I could see that Grandpa was getting tired. He said: Parson, what do you want? Parson said: I dont want much, just enough to keep body and soul togather. Just then some one called for Grandpa. It was the feed man had brought feed for the cows. Grandpa said to his wife to look after Parson and give him what he needed. Then said: I will be busy for a while putting feed in the barn loft, and went out.

Parson praised Grandpa highly to Eva, telling how lucky she was to have such a good provider. Lets get me fixed up. She taken him in the smoke house where meat was hanging all around the walls. Parson stood staring at the meat. Then he said: You know, you are just as pretty as your Ma was when she was young. Eva smiled, then said: Get what you think you need. Ely will help you take it to the wagon. I have to get back to the baby.

Parson takened four hams, four shoulders, off the wall. Then two stands of lard, four sides of bacon. He didnt carry one piece. I had to make many trips. When we got the meat loaded, he went in the house, asking Sister Eva did she have any bedded vegetables and butter and eggs. She told him yes. She taken him to the cellar where there were cabbages, turnips, sweet and Irish potatoes bedded in sand and straw. Parson filled two grass sacks full. I told Parson he would have to help me with the sacks. Eva taken one end of the sack, I the other. Parson just walked to and frow with us. When we got all of this on the wagon it was full.

I went to tell Grandpa that Parson was leaving. We started to Parsons wagon. Grandpa let out his pet word: Got ding, I didnt tell him to move me away. That wagon will break down before he gets down the mountain.

Parson saw us coming. He rushed to meet us, saying: Brother Ned, your heart is bigger than a horse. I dont know any other that could persuade me to take as I have—only you and your lovely wife. All Christians know that the Scripture say that it more blessed to give than to receive. And you will receive many blessing as a cheerful giver. Parson kept talking as he got on the wagon. He said: I will be looking for you the second Sunday in May. I must try to be home by dark. It is one oclock now. He drove down the trail.

Grandpa stood looking after Parson. Eva went to the house. I knew that Grandpa wasnt pleased at all about Parson taking so much. Parson didnt let Grandpa say a word. He still hadnt said anything after he said: Got ding. He was still standing there looking at Parson going down the trail.

He seemed to be pondering over somthing for a few minutes. Then he said: Got ding if I can get this here religion right, so help me. There is a big man that could plow, cut wood, and could raise his own food. But instead he has the nerve to come to a hard working mans house to take what he wants. This is why that I just cant get the Resurection in my mind. You all spirits can be in that communiun, but not evil spirits in the Reserection. And this talk they do about the white folks here in Sewanee not being Christians. I dont know if they are or not, but there is one thing they dont do, and that is go to peoples houses and rob them in the name of God. They are giving instead of taking from us niggers. Then he said: Lets get back to sawing wood. Confound it, if I could get this Resrection in my head it might be better. We sawed wood untill we had enough. Grandpa went into the smoke house to see that half of one side of the smoke was cleaned of meat. He started his God ding and Communion of Saints. Eva didnt have anything to say.

That evening while eating supper Grandpa said: That Parson sure can eat. I thought he would never get that long gut of his full. The reason I wanted Red Hoss to come and eat with us because the Parsons never get enough when chicken is on the table. Eva said: Ned, you are just mad because you had to give away something. The things you use to do when you were coarting me. You put five dollars in the collecting. You came down there with a rubber-tired buggy and a span of horses. I and the other people thought you were rich.

He pushed his chair back from the table, and said: If this Got ding Parson has to come and bless the baby many times, we will be in the poor house. He said: I have to go on my privey work tonight. Keep the fire going when you go to bed, talking to his wife. He said: The reason I supose there is no nigger preachers in the Episcopil churches here is they wouldnt be allowed to begg people or rob them on the word of the scripture. He went out to do his job.

In a short while Mama Mats youngest son came to tell me to come to the house that we were going to live in the next morning to help him clean it up. That some sager had been living in it and it was filthy. Mama Mat was coming two days later. We had to move in the afternoon.

The house was close to the cemetery. I was glad. I, like most all the Negros, liked to attend funerals when any of the high-ups died. They all got a military funerel. I liked to hear the shots and taps blown. I would be there.

The next morning after helping milk I had to walk a half mile to the house. This was close to where Jack Prince lived. Tommy, my adopted brother, we scrubbed and cleaned the house. It was very dirty. We got moved that afternoon.

I had to go back to Grandpas that night to sleep. I had to meet the eight oclock train the next morning. I was so glad my dog will be with Mama. Grandpa said while we were eating supper: Red Hoss, I wish you were going to stay with me. I am going to miss you a lot. Eva said: I will too. You will come and stay once and a while. Grandpa said: I will go to the train in the morning and haul their trunks for Mat. You can come and get meat whenever you want it. I reached over and put my hand on his and said: I can? He said: If I can give a Got ding preacher everything he wants I surely can give my son what he needs.

This was sweet music to my ears. I thanked him, and said: When I am a good mountain man I will give it back to you. He said: I know you will. You are too much like me. You wont ever ask for much from any one. You are too brave to use people. I am glad you are made that way.

I had become a bit sentiamently. Tears was dropping from my cheeks. I was so happy to have some one to love me. I hadnt felt like this since I left Ann, and she is far away in Texas. I loved her dearer than any one.

That night I lie in bed thinking: Almost three years no one had called me a bastard or Clabber. I am grown up. I am fifteen. I dont have to take anything I dont like off of anybody. I will fight when I am missused. Thats what Grandpa or Jack Prince would do. I am a bastard, I know, but I dont like to be reminded of it. I wont be a nigger or Negro. From the way the law treats them they are not free men. I am going to be a man. A Negro is not a man, only with other Negroes. When white men speak to Negros, they bow. I cant see why, even as brave as Grandpa is, every time one of them speak to him he pulls his hat off and bows way down. I guess thats why they call him good old Ned. He is good. Lots of Negros call him a devil or a polecat. I dont like the name at all. They dont know him.

The next morning we met the train. We loaded the trunk. Mama Mat scolded me when she saw me for not staying in Winchester and go to school. I was almost sure I was going to get a whipping. Aunt Charlott was with her. They got in the wagon. Tepsy and I, my dog—he was so glad to see me he chewed my hand and whined as if he was trying to talk—I refused to ride. I wanted to walk with my dog. We taken a short cut and beat them home. I stopped by my stepfathers house and got the fourteen dollars he was keeping.

I noticed Mama Nat was cripeling badly. She was in a bad humor all the way, and Aunt Charlottes knees was as large as her head caused from imflatory rheumatism. I knew now how bad Mama needs me. School or no school, I am going to take care of her. I started the fire in both stoves.

When they arrived she and Grandpa was quarlling as always. They were distant cousins of the old slave family the name Handely. I helpt Grandpa get the trunks and bundles in the house while Mama and Aunt Charlotte hobbled inside. Grandpa called me to the wagon before he left, and said: Red Hoss, she need you with her. I see how bad. I am going to bring meat, butter, and milk this afternoon.

I went into the house with my air gun in my hand. Tepsy was still licking my hands. He was so glad to be with me. I had prepared my feelings to take the whipping if that was what it taken to apeaze her. Mama beleived in whipping children for anything she thought they were wrong. I got lots of whippings. They were busy taking their belongings out of the trunk. I was standing looking and Mama looked around and saw I had a gun. She said: Where did you get a gun and what did you do with your money that you were to go to school on? I am going to whip the hide off you, my litle man. I will teach you to do what I tell you to do.

I taken the fourteen dollars from my pocket and gave it to her, saying: I had fifteen dollars when I got here. I bought two pair stockings at fifty cents, and I payed fifty cents down on this gun. Mama, if you want me to go back to school, I will. Aunt Charlotte, looking strait at Mama, said: Mat, wasnt that sweet of him to save the money for you? How can you whip him? Mama looked the other way.

Aunt Charlotte was an advanced woman. She used to teach school at Stevenson, Ala. Her husband, Uncle Henry, had died since I left Ala. He was one of the Tenth Caverly men who charged the blockhouse. He had told me the story many times and often said he wish he could adopt me.

Aunt Charlotte was holding the barrell of a shotgun in her hand. She said: This is Henrys gun. I want you to have it when you are sixteen. You have a few months to go. You will have to get someone to put the stock on it. I had to take it off so I could put it in the trunk.

Mama spoke: I am not going to whip you this time. I dont know if I can spare you to go to Winchester or not. Aunt Charlotte said: Mat, I will teach him here. He will be my only pupil. Mama said: That will be fine. I had forgotton you use to teach school.

Aunt Charlotte said: You know, Mat, Ely and I have a lot in common that you dont know about. He use to come to me and Henry often to ask questions. The boy studys all the time. Some time he gets stalled in his mind. Thats when he comes to me to get the explanation. I thought he would go crazy about the Negro religion. I helpt him all I could.

She looked at me, saying: How do you see it now? I said: I understand it thoroughly, Aunt Charlotte. She said: How you have advanced so quick. Did you give uptrying to be converted? I said: Yes. When I came here to see Father Eastern for many days he explained to me that I am a Christian, and I will never be the shouting kind. I am a Episcopalian. I was born one. I will live as one, and living and loving people will be my job if I can. Although I just cant see how I can be a Negro. I wont be that.

Mama Mat said: I dont want to hear any more about you being a Negro. Aunt Charlotte handed me a small dictionary and said: Look up Negro. I found the word nigger first. It said “pertaining to Negro.” I closed the book and gave it to Aunt Charlotte. I taken the bucket and went to the spring for water. On the way I was thinking how things were summing up. Everything is coming to me. I am making people love me, even Grandpa. Soon I will have a real gun all my own. I am close to Father Eastern, close to Jack Prince. He will fix the gun. He fixes guns. I havent been called any names for a longtime. I am not going to let anybody call me names any more. I dont care if I dont play with the boys in the Bottom. I have plenty to do. I soon will be going into the mountains. No Negros out there, nothing but sagers. They dont call you names you dont like. Up untill this time white people had been most kind to me.

Just as I got to the house Grandpa drove up, calling me to come and help him unload. He brought two hams, two shoulders, a stand of lard, butter, cabbage, turnips, potatoes, and sausage. He hung the meat to the rafters on the back porch.

Then he told Mama that what money she had to hold on to it. That everybody was using scrip to buy with. You write a note to the Brooks Store and ask for credit and the Winn Store. They will give you credit. These white people here in Sewanee beleive in taking care of us niggers. They aint gowan let their nigger starve. Not us good ones. These provisions I brought you is not a gift. I owe them to Red Hoss. He has worked hard since he came, helping me milk, sawing wood, and cureing meat. I am paying him off in provisions.

Mama said: You are trying to be better since you got a seventeen year old wife. I hear she is one pretty country gal. You had better be good to her because I cant raise your daughter like I did Elys mother thirty years ago. You know you are the meanest polecat to woman that ever lived. I think you got trouble on your hand to come. And dont bring it to me. I think any old coot sixty years old trying to match life with a gal seventeen year old is crazy. Grandpa could never outtalk Mama. He just grinned and said: Anything I got just let me know, and went to the wagon.

Mama gave me a note to take to Mr. Brooks store. Mr. Brooks was a kind man. He lived inside the corporation, a fine family. This was the biggest store in town and the only one that delivered free. He and his sons ran this store. Bert and Preston were his sons and a beautiful daughter. Miss Amy was her name. They had always been most kind to me and all colored people. He read the note, then said: Tell Mat she can have anything she wants. He filled out our order which was staples. I carried them home. I helpt Mama put up the quilting frames. Aunt Charlotte had a lot of quilt facings she had pieced. They began quilting them.

Aunt Charlotte said I was ready for the fourth grade. She gave me money to buy a reader, speller, rhithmatick, history, geography. I had to study hard my books and bat cotton for the quilts.

As they finished a quilt I would go and show them to what few white people of the upper class that was still in town. She sold them for two dollar and a half a piece. I sold several. This money helpt buy medicine and linements for them.

I became so happy with Aunt Charlottes teaching. She would read storys to me. She liked to read. The first book she read to me was Ruby Gordon Back from the Grave. My Tennessee history told about Daniel Boone, David Crockett. Every word soaked in pertaining to being a mountain man.

For two months I carried wood out of the woods nearby, washed the dishes, and made the fires every morning, study my books, and batted cotton. This kept me busy.

The weather had been rough. Mama Mat said to me as spring came forwarded: Ely you have been a good boy. This is one winter I havent put my foot in the snow. We are going to raise a garden. Then we will do some washing and ironing for the white people. And I will make saltrising bread and you can sell it. I know some people that will buy it. You and I will do the washing. Charlotte can sit and iron and do the ruffles and the fluting. This summer we can do good. I said: Mama, I will make a shine box and shine shoes. This I started to do at once.

School had opened on March fifteenth. The town was alive again. People were on the move. I made on Sunday morning close to a dollar shineing shoes, before time to go to Sunday School. For a long time no one had called me any of the names that I didnt like. I was happy. I had forgotten much of the hate that I had carried, for both the Negro calling me a bastard and Clabber and some whites calling me nigger. Everything was different. I am somebody. I know some people love me. I will help Mama save money, and I will go school even if I have to go to Saint Marys at Nashville where Father had spoke of.

All of a sudden Aunt Charlotte decided she would go to her home in Ala. This leaves Mama and I alone. I built up a number of coustomers for Bread: Mrs. Selden, Mrs. McCrady, Mr. McMillan, Mr. Hall, Mrs. Barnwell. They would take two loaves a week at twenty cents a loaf.

Mama was called the best laundress in the town. She specialized in shirtwaists and white skirts and underware for women and shirts for men. She said by doing small jobs like this she could make more out of it. The errands kept me busy.

It seemed to me that Sewanee hadnt been as beautiful as it was now. The tourists was coming in. The streets had carriages, the ladies with ruffeled parasoils dressed in white. The hotels were filled with guests. I sold violets and honeysucker that I colected wild.

Often the guests would pay me ten cents a gallon for water from the ATO spring. This water was suposed to be ninty per cent pure, equal to the Vermount water. Many people came there to drink the water from the two springs, ATO and Tremlet Spring that the Indians named Rattlesnake Spring. Both were alike, flowed from a cave ice cold and as clear as a crystal.

One morning Mama sent me to deliver a package at the Barnwell boarding house for a lady name Smith. As I was waiting for the money a lady with a small boy ask me would I like to care for her son in the afternoon? Just weekdays. She would pay a dollar a week. I told her I would have to ask my Mama.

I told Mama about it. She said: That is good pay and close to home. She said: Tommy, my son, and his wife are going to move in with us. Ora, his wife, can help with the clothes. You take it. Thats good pay. The next day I went to work. The little fellow had been afflected with typhoid fever the summer before. He was still convelesing from this attack. They were from Meridian, Miss. She had come here for his health, as she told me. She said: Mr. Davis will be here later. The babys name is Sam. Now you be good to him and I will be good to you. I liked the little boy.

She bought a hammock so we could swing under the trees shade. I had a lot of fun. There were many children, mostly girls. They sang a lot. The songs were “School Days,” “Come be my Rainbow.” All afternoon we played. Every day I would take Sam on my back to play horse with him. I would play galloping. He got a kick out of it. A hour of this and he would be ready to take his afternoon nap which he would sleep in the hammock, while I would swing gently. He was soon full of life.

She was very kind. Always spoke kind. I was most happy here.

A month later her husband came. I knew he was coming. He came out with Sam and said: You are the boy that takes care of my son. He has improved so much in this mountain air. And you have helpt him a lot. I was so glad to hear him say that. Then he said: He likes niggers. We have one name Sambo at home, the cooks boy. Sam is crazy about him. There is nothing like a nigger to care for a white child. I bet on it. You all go and play.

I stood looking at him. He said: Take him. I said: No, I wont. At this moment Mrs. Davis walked up. I said: Lady, pay me. I quit. She said: Sam, what is wrong? He said: How much do you owe him? She said: A dollar tomorrow. His week will be up. She ask me why was I quiting. I told her that I wasnt a nigger and I wont work for anybody that called me a nigger.

She started to say somthing. He motioned his hand, then handed me a dollar, then said: I have heard how high collard the niggers are here in this town. I went out the back way, not thinking what Mama will think about it.

When I got home, Mama and her son and his wife were peeling peaches, sitting on the porch. I was still angry. When she ask what are you doing home this early, I told her I quit. The man called me a nigger and I am not going to work for anybody that calls me that. Mama said: You quit? I said: Yes, Mama. She walked to the willow bush, broke a switch off, and said: You go back to them people and ask them to take you back. I will tell you when to quit a job. I thought you had got all that nonsense out of your head. I said: Mama, I just cant go back. She began whipping me. I continoued to say: I cant, Mama. She stoped whipping for moment. She said: I am going to whip you untill you go back to the job.

I knew she meant what she said, so I gave her the dollar they gave me and said: Alright, Mama. Ill go back. She said: And you do your job well, and forget about being a nigger. As I walked away I felt the welts on my arms and legs. I would rather die than speak to that white man again. I decided that I would leave Mama and try to live with somebody else. I can take care of myself. I am not a nigger to nobody. If I was a bit larger, I would have shown him how wrong it is to call people what they are not.

I went to my stepfathers house. He hadnt come from work. Sarah, his wife, was home. I told her I wanted to live with them and why. She said that Father could not take me from Mama Mat. I could wait untill he come and talk to him. I waited for him. I talked with him, asking him could I live with him for a while. We sat on the doorstep of his house. I knew he loved me as much as he did his own son. He didnt answer me for a while. He sat looking at the ground.

When he spoke he said: You know too you are not my son. You were given to Mat to raise. That was your mothers wish. We both loved her. If she had lived things would have been lots different. I dont like to see you having such a hard time. I know Mat is doing the best she know. Try to stay with her. You have been a boy hard to understand. I will go to Mat and have a talk with her. You will soon be a man. Then you can choose for yourself.

I ask him did he think I should go to Grandpa. He said: No. It wont be pleasent there. Ned is having family trouble. He and Eva are seperating. He is drinking a lot. It is no place for you. I will go to see Mat as soon as I eat my dinner. You go home. I had no intension of going home, not now anyway.

I went to the playground where the children played. I hadnt stopped there in five years. My little brother was playing with his pals, having a good time with all. He was eight years old. His skin was dark. He had a father. As I stood looking at him I was pleased to think he is not an orphan, not a bastard. What a difference it makes when you are both. The sun was still high. It was five oclock. I wanted to be alone for a while. I started to go up on the main street in the corporation. At this time of day lots of the people taken walks. I loved to watch them. Many of them spoke to me, and I might find somthing to do to make money.

I was in my bare feet like all boys my age in the summer months. There was a small stream fed by the overflowing cesspools in the corporation. As I waded there were little children playing in the sand. I stood looking at them. They didn’t have no shovels, no sand bucket, no kind of tools like the white children had to play with. I had played in this stream when I was a small boy, damming it up, making water wheels turn as the water flowed over the dam. What fun it was. These children dont have anything to play with, just their hands. My thoughts went back to my job. Sam who I had been nursing had a sand box, rake, shovel, hoe, three sand buckets, wheel barrow. His daddy called me a nigger. I will steal these toys and give them to these poor kids. Thats what I will do.

I had to wait untill nine oclock before it would be dark enough to slip in the yard and not be seen. I had to crawl a hundred yards to reach the sand box, and crawl back out. I take every thing except the wheel barrow. I cut the hammock to threads. I went back to my stepfathers house, taken the toys, hiding them in the shrubery in the yard. Everybody had gone to bed. I did not awake anyone. I layed on the porch to rest. Then I slept untill morning. I heard Sarah beating the round steak. I knew we were going to have chicken, fried steak, and onion gravy for breakfast. I was so hungry.

I went into the kitchen. Sarah, my stepfathers wife, said: Did you go home? I told her I had slept on the porch all night. I ask where was Father. She said: He has gone to the well to get fresh water, and take the milk and butter out of the well where we put it to keep cool. You can go home now. Lee went to talk to Aunt Mat last night. I dont think she will whip you this time. She handed me a bowl of bread crumbs to feed the chickens which I quickly threw to them.

As Father came, he said: What are you doing here so early? Sarah said: He slept on the porch last night. He said: Why did you do that? Dont ever do that again. You go to Mat as soon as you eat breakfast. And be a good boy. Mat thinks she is right. She said you are getting very hard to handle. She wants you to know how to work. She says that people that dont like to work will steal. And we dont want you to be like that. I went home as I promised. Mama was very angry with me. She didnt whip me. I told her I woud find work enough to make seventy five cents a week, if I had time to look for work. She said: Alright.

That afternoon I taken the toys I had stolen to the little colored children. When I found them there were twice as many as there was the day before. I didnt have enough at one each to go half way around. Some of them began to cry because I hadnt given them any. Now I was sorry I had brought any. I must do something for the others. So I raided every playground in the corporation untill all the little children had some toys. The idea came to me that white people had everything. They could afford to be stollen from. And Negroes had nothing. I am helping them. They will like me for it.

I got a job at Mrs. Emma Tuckers, washing the pot vessels for fifty cents a week, and my meals. I would shine the boarders shoes, five cents a shine. Soon I was making a dollar and quarter a week. Everybody kept their shoes shined in Sewanee at that time. I held this job untill school closed for the winter.

One of Mrs. Tuckers daughters was married to a man name Elery Huntington who was a professer in a colladge up North and came South for his vacation in the summer. He became a victim of slow fever. That caused him to be a bed patient for six month. He forgot how to walk.

Mrs. Susie Huntinton his wife hired me after the students had left to stay around to keep the coal supply in. I soon became his nurse. I taught him to walk again.

I was the only one for a while that could persuade him to take his medicine, and eat what his diet call for. I would sit on the bed, and plead with him to eat the mush. Mr. Huntington was a fine man. He liked me. When I would be pleading with him to eat, he would say: Ely, you sure want me to get well, dont you? He would take a mouthfull, and hold it before he could swallow it as if it was so repulsive. Sometimes tears would be rolling down my cheeks by the time he finished.

He began to gain rapidly—in January, 1909, this was. One morning Dr. Hall, his Dr., called me and Miss Susie his wife into the hall and said to her to try to get him to walk. This was the hardest task we had to do—Mrs. Hunniton on one side and I on the other. For two weeks it was a struggle to get him in motion. Soon he gained his equilibrium and was on his way back to health. I massaged him every day. This was the first lesson on being a trainer and practical nurse. By spring he had gained thirty five pound. In May he and his family left for New York. He had two sons Elery Jr. and Fritz. I never saw him again. It was fifty three years before I saw Mrs Susie Hunninton again.

I was so happy at this time. I had spent most of my time helping Miss Susie with everything. She was motherly in every way. There was prayer every morning. I would pray for him. I felt so close to them. I wanted to go with them when they left. For six months no one had mentioned nigger nor bastard at all. I had about forgotten about it. The only time I saw any colored people was Sunday afternoon when I went to Sunday School. No one ever insulted anybody there.

This year everything taken a big change. St. Agustus got a new presider by the name of Tyson, a minister from New York. Father Gerry went into South Carolina, where he was made Bishop. The schools changed from summer season to winter like all other colledges in the South. The medical and law schools was relinguished. Now there were just four training classes: theology, civil ingernerring, S.M.A., and arts and sciences.

We colored people had a good go. School all winter, the tourists in summer. All table waiting, pressing, cooking, janitor work, and most of dray business was done by colored people. A good laundress could make more money than anybody.

This is when I became to know how the white people were interested in the progress of their colored people. We had football teams, baseball teams. The coaches of varsity teams would come and coach our teams. Any colored coledge that would come to play with us they would invite them. White people would attend the games.

We had two dance halls. All coledge boys got the hotel work at Monteagle, another resort six miles away. Sewanee was the jovial headquarters for them to come to. To me at that time Sewanee was a little Rome of the South, and everybody loved it—both races. After the Huntingtons left, I helpt my mama by delivering laundry. This year I taken a vast change from loving everybody and trying to love everybody, because I was struck harder by insults and imposed on willfully more than ever before. I am almost seventeen, although I am a bit small to my age.

One morning when I was returning from delivery of laundry, a wagon with two young boys driving it was going my direction. Most of these sagers that came through the corporation were very good to the colored people, because we often bought their produce. I ask could I ride. One of them bowed his head. I climbed in from the back. Just as I straitened up I saw the larger one standing with a hand ax in his hand, drawn back to throw. He said: No nigger rides in my wagon. He threw the ax. I could not dodge it. It struck me in the chest, knocking me out of the wagon. Falling to the ground I was knocked unconscious. We were in front of the Gregory home. Mr. Gregory ran the bank, he and Mr. Hodson.

When I came to my senses Mrs. Gregory and her son Winfred had draged me out of the road to the sidewalk. She was wiping my face with a wet towel. She said: You are Ely. I saw that boy throw that ax at you knocking you out of the wagon. How cruel can any one be? We pulled you to the sidewalk. Can you walk? My chest was hurting very bad. She said to Winfred: Help him go to Dr. Joe Seldons which was a half block away. The Dr. said I had a fractured collar bone. When he finished with it, he said I would have to wear this bandaging for two weeks. I went home. I couldnt do anything.

I got very bitter thinking how white people will do a colored person. I am going to be like the Negros in Alabama. Keep me a gun. This is the last time that any white person will ever harm me again that I dont do it back. I will get even with this sager some day if I have to shoot him.

When I got home I told Mama Mat about how it happen. I didnt tell her my thoughts of a revenge. This was the first time any one had hurt me by a act of violence. Mama only said: Keep off other peoples wagons. You had no right to ask for a ride from people that you dont know. They must be some sagers from Tick Bush. They are all mean, and dont like Negros. I am glad the blade didnt strike you.

I carried the ax home with me. It was very sharp. I carried this ax in the mountains with me for three years. For three weeks I could only walk around. I went to the playground where the colored kids played. No one had anything to say to me. They acted as if I wasnt there.

The next day I taken my dog and went to Morgan Steep look-out. I went to the herb beds where Grandpa had show me every thing green and fragrant. I learned to know what the leaves looked like. The ginseng I soon reconized with its red flower in the fork of the stalk like Grandpa told me it would be, growing in the shade of the muskadime vines. I sat at the waterfalls for a long time, thinking for the first time about life—what is to be done with life. Some people have everything, others dont have anything and have to be kicked around, it seemed. I thought of everything I felt that was wrong that had been done me.

It seemed to me that everybody of the Negros and poor white people wanted to hurt anybody they could. This is why I am being treated like I am. Nobody cares for me. The aristocrats have been good to me because they know they are the cause of me being a bastard. My uncle and my grandmother dont ever say anything to me. I must find something to do that I dont have to bother them. It seemed that every bitter thought I had ever had came back.

Tepsey, my little fox terrier, was looking me in my face as if he understood everything I was thinking. He put his head in my lap, and Iayed there. I made up my mind that this would be the last time I would ever humble to anybody, and accept hurt. I will fight anybody that do me wrong—Negros and white people. Father Eastern tells me to love everybody. This would be alright if somebody loved me.

I began to pray asking to be shown what to do and how. I layed back on the rock looking into the sky. It was plesant and warm on this rock.

When awakened I was talking to my Mama Lena. I thought she was standing by me, and she was saying: Be brave, my son. Be patience. Go up and look at the beauty in Gods mountains. Tepsy was still lying with his head in my lap. I knew it was a dream. I had to sit and think it over for a while. It seemed so real that she was there.

We climbed to the top of Morgan Steep. I remembered she said look at Gods mountains. When I had looked out over the caldron I hadnt noticed the laurel was in bloom. The whole ridge to the right was crimson red. I stood there gazing at how beautiful it was. There were magnolia trees with huge white blossoms flickering in the sun like the wings of a flock of white birds. I sat down to still look at this beautiful sight of the mountain of God. The echo from Cannon Ball as it reported for Cowan, Tenn., floated up the canyon and added to this enchantment. I could almost hear the mountains say: This is where you belong. I will take care of you. I stayed there untill the sun set. It added more beauty to the scenery.

Many people came walking and in carriages. I did not even look to see who they were. I had found the answer to what I wanted to know. These mountains was my home. They belong to God. I rose and started home in soft twylight. Something had happened that day that I did not try to tell anybody about it. I lost all fear of everything. I became more determined that I would have what I wanted and that here was peace and happiness. I am going to deal with the mountains as soon as I can get me a rifle. I stop talking to everybody like I had been.

When I got home Mama Mat ask where had I been gone all day. I told her of the day and how peaceful things had been, and that I had been told that the mountains were my home. She was in an unusal good humor. She smiled and said: What will you think next? Then she said: That was the Martins boy that hit you with that ax. Jack Prince told me today they are some of that Tick Bush sagers. Jack said come out to see him. I said: Its alright, Mama. Ill get even with him if he stays on these mountains. I am not going to let no one get by with nothing. Nobody. Niggers or white people. When they hurt me I am going to hurt back.

She said: You shut up. You will get killed making trouble with white people, even if they are sagers. I had started to the kitchen to go to bed. Why I felt so sure of myself I dont know. I had never said anything back contrary to her opinion before tonight. I stopped in the door way. I said: Mama, you can whip or kill me if you should want. I wont raise my hand against you. But no one had better not put a hand on me to hurt me—not even your son will not whip me again. No one except you. Mama ask: Whats come over you today? Who have you been talking to? I said: No one except the mountains and Mama Lena. I can see people will keep you on your knees if you will stay there. I am not that blood, guess. I am not a nigger. He has no law and is not even a man. I am going to be a man. I am going to take care and protect you and everything I have. I see I am going to live alone most of the time. Mama just stood looking at me when I said good night.

That night as I lay in bed I wasnt sleepy. I had slept on the rocks a long while. I thought of my Mama Lena—how she linger with her sickness. That she was incurable. I hope I dont have to die with consumption. I will go ask Dr. Seldon what should I do to keep from having it. Some people claimed it was hereditary. I am small to my age. I must develope and be strong. Dr. Joe will tell me how to do it. I hadnt been advised by no one anything about spiritual aid, as I learn to know in later years, although from this day I never felt that I was alone anymore. All my life I have felt not alone.

Talking to the Dr., he told me that consumption was not inherited. It was contracted. Sleeping outdoors was good. Never sleep closed in. With plenty of fresh air you should never have it. He showed me how to take breathing exercises and do atheletics work. Dont smoke ciggeretts.

When I left him I stoped at Mr. Gregorys house to thank them for aiding me when I was hurt. As I approached the front door Mrs. Gregory said: Come in, Ely. She was a most kind lady. I explained that I stopped to thank them for helping me. Winfred and Charlie had a glass of lemonade each. Mrs. Gregory said: Wont you have a glass? We sat in the parlor and drank the lemonade. Mrs. Gregory said: Ely, I need some one to empty the slop jars and fill the water pitchers in my roomers rooms every evening. Would you do this? I will pay twenty five cents a week. I agreed to do it because it was close to home. I could do it any time between two oclock and six in the afternoon.

I went to Jack Princes house when I left the Gregorys house. I knew I wanted to see Jack Prince more than anyone I knew. When I arrived at his house, he yelled out: Come, little Ned. I went in the house. He said: I am going out to the barn. How is your shoulder? Those Tick Bush sagars are a hell of a lot. Dont ever have any part of them polecats. Boy, you ought to go around old man Ned more often. He is drinking himself to death. That young wife is driving him crazy. I found him lying on the ground drunk the other morning out there in the woods with his privy wagon. I did not tell Mat. I know how you think of him. He is a good old polecat and thinks a lot of you. So go and see him.

He came out. We walked toward the barn. He was still talking about Grandpa. A man drove up name Dodson. I knew he often sold produce from the valley. He leaped off the wagon, snatched out a pistol, drew on Jack, saying: I got you this time. My heart almost choked me. I didn’t know they were friends. I thought it was the real thing.

Jack said: Where did you get it, Dodson? He said: I bought it off a skunk for ten dollars. He handed the gun to Jack, saying: Its one of the latest. It is a Colt forty five. Jack said: What balance! He threw a tin can into the garden twenty steps away. For six shots he kept the can bouncing.

Dodson said to me: He is the best the country has got. Jack said to Dodson: This is my pupil. He is going to be a mountain man. You ought see him shoot a dam air gun. He dont miss a dime twenty feet away. I only gave him one lessen. That was how to squeeze the shot off. He hold a gun like his arms were made of stone. He dont have any nerves. I am going to make him the best rifle man around here. Youll see.

Dodson said: If we have to stop a feud like we had with the Tick Bush bunch that time, we will need him. Jack said: Dont mention that. They laughed. Dodson got on his wagon and drove away. Jack said to me: Dodson and I have had some tough jobs rounding up the moonshiners in these mountains.

I said: Mr. Prince, I want a rifle, a good one—a Winchester that is good for a hundred yards. He said: What the hell are you going to shoot that far away? I said: Thats what I want. He said: You are not thinking of shooting somebody, are you? I said: If that has to be done, thats it. Jack said: You stick close to me. Ill do your fighting. I know you are bitter towards some people. But forget about fighting.

Henry, his son, drove up. He said: You are just who I want to see. How would you like to work with me this winter? I have leased five hundred acres of crosstie cutting. I have a contract for three sets of switch ties and two strait sets. I am to deliver them in March. I will pay you fifty cents a day. We will hue the ties where we cut the trees and snake them out with the oxes. You can learn to drive them then. When we dont want to work we will hunt.

I didnt answer him at once. Jack said: If you will help him, I will let you have a gun—a Winchester thirty two special. You will have to leave it here. You will have it only when you are going to hunt. You cant shoot it around town. It ranges too far. I want eight dollars for it. You can pay fifty cents a week. Its a good gun, been trued to the finest bead. In a few days you will be picking the eyes out of the woodpeckers. I told him I had to ask Mama. Jack said: Mat wont care. She know I will take care of you at all times.

As I passed the graveyard I saw Cretcher and Henry Woods digging a grave. These two colored men worked for the city. I knew some of the notables had died, and there to be a big funeral. I hadnt been up town since I was hurt. I hadnt heard that Mr. Du Bose had died untill I ask Henry Woods. He told me who it was.

I felt somewhat sick for a few moments. He I had known from the first day I was large enough to be on the streets. He always spoke to me. When at a distance he would motion his cane at me like a salute.

I knew this would be a military funeral. I got to see this. I had wait an hour. While I was waiting there came two white boys. I had seen them on the streets. They did not go over in the main streets where most of the other boys played. I would only see them on Sunday at church when I went to see the cadets parade. I knew they were of the notables that lived in the corporation. They had been hunting.

Each spoke to me. One boy was seventeen, the other was my age. They told me their names were D.S. and John McKay. D.S. was the oldest. He had a twenty two caliber rifle. D.S. said: Lets go over to the back of the graveyard and target practice while we wait for the prosession. We did.

I told them my intention of becoming a mountain man. I told them all I had learned about the profit that could be made if you just knew where to find it, such as herbs, berrys, nuts, grapes, flowers, mineral water, and game of all kind. I am studying how to be a crack shot. Johny, he was most interested in my plans.

They found a small tin can, placed it against the rock wall. Each of them taken turns shooting at it. Four shots each—no hits. D.S. ask me did I want to try. I said: Yes, explaining that I hadnt shot a real gun like this one. I only had a air gun. He handed me the gun. I had to shoot with one hand. He cocked the gun for me. I shot five times hitting the can every shot. They were astounded to think that I could beat them shooting with one hand. I explained to them everything Jack had taught me. Here I found a hunting pardner. D.S. had to go to Chicago to go to school. This he told me.

On the way back to where the grave was we decided to get on the rock fence close to the gate where we could see everything. The fence was five feet high. They helped me get on the fence and put my dog on it too. We sat there through all of the ceromony. This was an unusal day for me.

As I sat there I could see people coming from all directions. I saw my grandfather and ten other older Negroes. Most of them we all called Uncle. They went in among the white people. When I looked again they had been placed at the head of the grave. There they stood with their bald heads shining in the afternoon sun. I knew that they had come to pay their respects to a man that had been a great man that had been their friend. I knew the white people of Sewanee held a high appreciation of their loyalty.

I had already become to feel sentimental when the cadets marched in by us. They were so proud as they executed their comands so gracefully. My thoughts went to Grandpa. He was cleaned up with a black suit on. I knew he would hear his most confusing statements: The Comunion of Saints, the Resrection, and his blessing which he always said: A man borned of a woman is in this world only a few days, and his heart is filled with trouble. I wonderd if it could be that be thought this phrase was correct because the earth was being fed back its own. I always tried to find some way to make Grandpa right as I could for my part.

Soon the cadets fired the shots of salute. Then Taps were blown. My mind went back to when I was seven years old when the cadets were my pride and joy. I was a bit sad.

D.S. spoke for the first time. Ask me would I walk home with them. It was only three hundred yards away. I was glad to do so. I knew I had found a friend in them. Reaching their home, D.S. introduced me to his mother. Johnny began to tell her what friends we were to be. This boy became the best friend I had for four years. His mother treated me as if I were a part of the family. Soon we began to hunt together. He did not care to profit in any thing. He just liked the sport of it and to be with me. Mrs. McKay gave us some lemonade. We drank it, thanking her as I started to leave.

D.S. said: I suppose you will be at St Agustus Sunday. There will be a lot of the people there that came here for the funeral. It will be a big turnout. I said: Ill be there. This was Friday.

The next morning I went to Dr. Seldons. He removed the brace from under my arm, taped my shoulder with adhesive so that I could put my arm through the sleeve of a coat.

I rushed home and ask Ma could I have fifty cents to get a hat to wear Sunday when I would meet Johnny at the church. It had been four years since I had gone to Saint Agustus to see the cadets march in. I knew I would see many people that I used to know. I saw Father Gerry at the cemertery. He had come here to preside over this ceromony as respect of this great man.

I told Mama about the McKays. She didnt know them. They hadnt lived in Sewanee very long. That I learned later. I still couldnt shine shoes. Dr. warned me not to use my left arm. I rarely wore a hat in the summer. I explained to Mama the reason I wanted a hat was I could tip my hat like the men. I would not have to bow. She smiled and shook her head with a shrug of her shoulders. Things had changed in every way since I had been, I felt, adopted by the mountains. This I never talked to any one except Tepsey, my dog.

All day Saturday I planned what I first would do to start make money. Wild grapes was ready. Lots of people bought them and muskadine. I could make at least a half dollar a day. What I couldnt sell Mama could use. Hunting grapes, Johnny and I could locate walnut trees, hickory nuts, and chesnuts, which we could sell to the school boys. The school boys were fond of nuts. They would buy all I could gather. Soon I would gather herbs too. I would tell Johnny about it.

Sunday morning I put on my suit I had bought to go to school. This was the first new suit I had owned. I had to go in bare feet. I didnt have any dress shoes. The August sun was bright and hot. I got to Saint Agustus before anyone except the janitor who also pumped the pipe organ. I wanted to see the notables as they drove up in their carrages.

Soon D.S. and Johnny arived. I told them I wanted to be where I could see the approach of everyone. We waited. Soon we could see that people were coming from all directions. Some walked, some in carrages. Ladies were mostly dressed in white, with parasoils. Many used rented carrages, which was called hacks, mostly owned by Henry Hoskins. We watched the carrages drive up and unload.

I was hoping to see Vice Chanselor Wiggins drive up. He had the finest span of horses, he and Professer Gray, and a carrage. They only lived a half block from the church. I saw he and Mrs Wiggins as they crossed the street. He like most of all the notables carried a walking stick, his silk hat glittering in the sun.

By this time the street was full of people. Every one was greeting one another. The carrage that had stopped beside us gave me a joyful thrill. This lady I admired her so much, Miss Sally Mallady, whom I hadnt seen in three years. She and Lady Gallier was riding in her carrage. She was the type of lady that made her presence felt whereever she appeared. I steped forward catching the reins close to the horses bridle. Mr Colmore who most of the students called General—he was the Dean of the schools—he and his two daughters, Miss Dora and Miss Eva, and Miss Hodson had just walked up. He assisted these ladies out of the carrage.

After their greetings Miss Malady looked to see who was holding her horse. She said: Why, Ely, you little scrapper. I havent see you for a time. She said: Take the weight out of the buggy. Snap the strap to his bit ring. Joe will wait for me, meaning the horse. This was somthing I had done for her when I was a small boy when she would drive up to the Supply Store.

She was always busy like most of this class of people. She was a brave woman. She drove her horse like any man could. She often would drive into the colored settlement to see about people that was sick, drive her carrage over ditches and rough roads. She had many times when she would be going in my direction stop her horse and tell me to get in the carrage. She would drop me off where it was most convenient for me. She was just a great lady like all of these people.

As they walked away the Curbysmiths drove up, Miss Bessie and Miss Carry. They were sisters, the remainder of the General Curbysmith family. They had a colored butler so the story was told to me that the General had raised from a small boy. His name was Ed. He was said to be the finest butler in town. They treated him like he was one of the family. These ladys mostly drove for themselves. They used a one seat carrage. When Ed had to go with them to keep from wrinkling their dresses, one of them would sit in Eds lap and the other would drive. They drove up in this style. The gentlemen helpt them from their buggy. Ed stayed to care for the horses.

The cadets was now approaching about two blocks away. Johnny and I got in Miss Maladys carrage so we could see over the crowd. There was to me the most wonderful sight to look at. It was the most regrettable experience for me when I learned I could never be a cadet. Here they came—a colum of individual human beings swaying with synchronize notion keeping cadence with the music of the band, coming to give their respect to God.

Johnny touched me on the arm and said: Two years from now I will be a cadet. This was the time I found that I enveyed Johnny. I did not answer him. He said: This is new uniforms they are wearing. Its like the West Point cadets.

Very few people had gone in the chapel. Most of the people were so fond of their cadets. As the cadets marched by us I saw an officer that I knew. He was once a cadet. I hadent seen him for many years. He was dressed different than the cadets. He wore a blue coat, gray pants with a yellow stripe on each side of the legs, the spreaded eagle on his cap, medals on his breast, a silver leaf on his shoulder. I knew he was a high ranking military officer. He and Captain Gillam had marched in front of the cadets. He gave the comand that formed company front.

Then they filed off two abreast, marching into the Chapel. Everybody proceeded after them. Johnny ask me was I going in. I said: No, you go. I will be in front when you come out. Johnny went with his brother. I rushed to the back of the Chapel where the choir assembled to march in and the officials. There were many visiting Bishops, and Bishop Gailor was there. That was the last time I saw him. I always felt these men had to be next to God. It was beautiful to look at these men with their gowns—some black, some purple with white cottas and decorated stoles, repersenting their significance to divinity. When they marched in I went to the street to look at the horses and carraiges. All of these were driven by colored men except one. That was Proffesser Grays. He had the only white servent in Sewanee that worked around the estate. There were many colored butlers on the street that worked in homes nearby who had take a chance to see the gathering, all of them neatly dressed. This was much encoruged by these notables to their servants to be immaculate at all times. You rarely saw any servant on the street without a tie on.

As I walked along passing many carrages I came upon Mrs. Gillems carrage. There sat Mamy Gillam, setting there waiting for Mrs. Gilliam to return. She didnt go in the Chapel as usual. I supose it was too much of a crowd for her. Her white hair was gathured to the top of her head with a small turban on. Her brown skin, her large eyes, sitting in a dignifyed way as if she was a queen. At this time I could almost worship the so called black mamy, untill later as I will tell you.

I went to Miss Maladys carrage and sat there untill service was over. There were many students in premises that could not get in the chapel. They were in groups talking.

Along came a fine looking big strong black man. He was the farther of a small child that I had given some of the toys that I stole from the white children. He was the only person that knew I was stealing. He was the cause of me stopping. I hadnt seen him in three years. He stopped and ask me was I trying to be a good boy. He said: I am now top trainer for the varsity team. Saturday afternoons if you will come to the gymnasuem you can get some shoe-shining to do.

His name was Willie. Some of the students reconized him and called him Six. A number of them chatted a bit with him about the coming team. When they subsided I ask him: Why do they call you Six? He laughed, then he said: Its because I have big feet. They give me so many shoes, and I cant wear any of them. They kid me by saying I wear the size twelve. So for short is Six. He was as humorisk as he was lovable to know. Little did I or he think that he would serve on that job for fourty years as one of the finest trainers of any coledge in the South.

Some of the people had began to come out of the Chapel. I went close to the Chapel so as to see everybody when they came out. Johnny and D.S. was already out on the steps. We stood back a distance on the lawn. D.S. said: They are going to build a new church. This is what this is all about. There is going to be a cornerstone laying next spring. It will be called Saint Agustus Cathedral. That excavating over there is where it is going to be.

We were standing on the side of the grounds just off the walkway on the lawn. Everybody going in that direction would have to pass by us. The cadets too. Most everyone had come out of the chapel when the cadets came out.

This day the cadets stole the show. Most of the notables of the men stood just across from us. The cadets went into formation and marched by them. This officer with this odd uniform was Major Archybald Butt. D.S. had been told by someone who he was. He use to be a cadet when he was in school. I knew I had seen him before. Now he is President Teddy Rosevelts bodyguard, and right hand man. As the cadets marched by the command was given: Eyes right. Major was standing out from the rest of the crowd. This was a respect to him. When they had marched out the people came into the walkway greeting the visiting guests.

The Bishops were standing on the steps and many ministers. Many of the people were greeting the Bishops. I went up to shake hands with Bishop Gailor. I hadnt been close to him since I was four years old, when I was babtized and he said he was my Godfather. I am sure he knew who I was. He grasp my hand gently with his right and patted the back of my hand with his left, saying: God bless you.

I was having a hard time trying to keep my toes from being stepped on. When I got clear of the mass of greeters to the Bishops, I was in the middle of the walkway, where Major Butt was standing. Many people were greeting him. I started by him. I was trying to recall where did I ever see him. Just then, I realized that he was the officer acting with the cadets when I used to try to keep up with them for two blocks on Sunday mornings.

I stood looking up at him, my hat in my hand. Very close to him were many young Iadys I knew: Miss Johnny Tucker, the Kirby Smith ladys, Miss Dora Colmore, Miss Sarah Hodson, and Frank Gailor, the Bishops son. They saw me standing back of the Major, I suppose staring at him.

Frank said to Major: You have an admirer, and nodded his head toward me. Major turned and looked at me, and said: Ely. Then he extended his hand, then said: I would know that sandy, curly head anywhere. He lead me to these ladys and said: This is the youngest cadet I ever knew. He will be a military man some day. When he was very small he used to march with us on Sunday mornings. He had to run to keep up. I was so berden with sentementality, that I was petrified. I just couldnt speak.

Mr. Hodson who ran the bank, Miss Sarah Hodsons brother, taken the Major by the arm. They walked away with the young ladys. I watched them as they crossed the street and entered the Hodsons broad driveway to the estate.

D.S. and Johnny was still waiting for me to come to them. It was now one oclock. Everybody in Sewanee went to dinner at this hour. I told Johnny I would see them the next day. They departed for home.

Miss Malady and a number of her set were in a groupe talking. I was glad to see that she had not gone. I would hold the horse and put the hitch weight back in her buggy for her. Soon she came and the lady who was with her. Dr. Hall assisted them into the carrage. I had put the weight in. I was holding Joe by the reins.

She thanked Dr. Hall, then said to me: Ely, you have been most kind looking after me. Here she held out her hand and drops a quarter in mine. I bowed and thanked her. She smiled and said to the lady: Ely is a aristocrat. Then said good bye.

I was hungry. I knew I could go to Mrs. Emma Tuckers. I was always welcome, like most all of the colored people that she knew. There I went. On the way I was thinking Miss Sally had said I was a aristicrat. I felt very proud to think even if I am not white, I am sombody. You have to be, to be a aristicrat. I am going to ask Father Eastern just what a aristicrat is, and why.

At the Tucker house was many people. She had extra help this day. For the help and colored people a table was set under a big oak tree. I went to the cook name Elnora, and ask her could I be of help to her. She said: Oh Lord, yes. She tossed an apron to me, saying: Clean up the pot vessels, empty those slop cans in the back. Your Grandpappy isnt here today. You can do his job. Half an hour later I had finished the job. She gave me a plate of food, saying: You can eat now. Heavens know when we will finish feeding this crowd.

I was hopeing we had fried chicken and candy yam potatoes which it was, and peach ice cream. I stuffed myself on ice cream. I told Elnora that I thank her. I must be on my way to Sunday School. As I was leaving I met Mr. and Mrs. Roseborough coming into the grounds. He called to me to come to them. I went with my hat in my hand like I had seen Grandpa do. He said: You are growing up to be a fine looking man. Do you belong to the choir at your church? I told him yes. He ask what night did we practice. I told him that Proffeser Sharp who trained the Saint Argustus choir trained us on Friday night.

He said: Good. I want you to escort my wife on Thursday nights to her bridge club. This night I am always very busy. I dont like her to be on the street alone. There often are these sagers going through the corporation to the valley. I just dont trust them. I will pay you fifty cents each night. So be at my house Thursday evening at seven oclock.

He ask what was wrong with my shoulder. I told him what happen. He said: This poor white trash is a bad lot. The Mrs. smiled and said: I will be looking for you. Then she said to him: You mean to give me a good looking boy friend, Irvin. She pulled her parasoil back as he placed a kiss. They went into the grounds.

Now I have almost all I can do. I can make money every day some way. On my way to Sunday School, I thought a lot about how the Sewanee people were so different from white people in other towns. They dont trust their own race here. To them I am a Negro. They trust we Negros more so than their poor white people. I am called a aristicrat. This must mean being very good. I will do everything I can to be of good.

As I started down the hill here was Dr. West pushing his small auto up the hill. I ran to help him. This was the first automobile that was owned by anyone in Sewanee. It was called a Brush. It had one cylinder. Not much power. It could not climb the hill with him in it. He had to put it so the clutch could move it, then push it to help the engine untill it was on top, than outrun it, and get in it. I helped him up the hill. He was going to the villidge on a call which was close to my chapel. He taken me with him.

When I got to St. Pauls nearly all of the Bishops and visiteng ministers came. This day I was made crossbearer of the choir. Many white people came to our chapel. They spent much time talking to we colored people. There were lectures given by many of the minesters. When service was over we all walked through corporation. This was somewhat a habit of us, to show respect to our superiors of divinity. Many of the white people would be walking in the afternoon sun. It was a custom with them to speak to every one of us. I have heard them say to their servants and to colored that they knew: How nice you looked Sunday. This of course encouraged every colored person to look his best, and to be as immaculate as they could. Most of our clothes were second handed. Clothes was about the cheapest buy we had to buy. With seven hundred men students, most of them rich mens sons, the cast-off or cheap sales kept every colored man well dressed.

These white people were very proud of their colored servants. I have heard them, even the school boys, critersize the poor sagers for the way they look. They wouldnt even speak to them.

Scandel was somthing you never heard about the white people. They had everything under such control that if a schoolboy was expelled no one knew why. All you knew was hes gone.

As we approached the street where the hotel was there were many carrages in the street, many ladys walking. It seemed everyone spoke to some of us. Most of this prossesion was young people ranging from ten years old to twenty. No older colored people attended Sunday School. I knew these boys and girls would go to Morgan Steep. There they would watch the sunset set, like the tourist do. They walked back home in the twylight. This was a romantic place to be at that hour of day.

I had walked with three of the Fathers. As we reached the Supply Store they left us to go in the store. I followed them to the steps. I said to one of them: Father, will you please tell me what a aristocrate is? He looked at the other two and smiled, then said: A man of character, a person who stands for virture. I thank him, and joined the other boys, feeling most proud that a Negro must not be an aristocrat. So I know I am not a Negro slave.

I was happy to have a friend like Johnny McKay, who wanted to go with me in the mountains. I had been selected to be a bodygaurd for Mrs. Roseborough, and maybe other ladies would hire me. Now I can make some money every day.

As I passed Mrs. Beesleys house, she ask me would I like to sell choclate fuddge and crullers at the games on Saturday at the park. She would give me a fourth of what I made. On Saturdays I made one dollar and a quarter to my part. This selling made me popular with all the students.

Johnny and I would go into the mountings three days a week. We soon knew every trail in the mountains. I had located almost every herb bed and scaley bark grove and chestnuts trees and wild grape arbours in the mountains for five miles around.

His female bull terrior that we had bred to Prof. Grays champion pointer named Dash soon delivered three fine pups. His mother refused to let him keep not one of them. I had to keep them all.

We never dreamed of what hunting dogs this cross breed would make. Jack Prince trimmed their ears. They looked like small mastiffs. By hard and patient training at two years old they were the finest coon dogs and wild hog and bird dogs in the mountains.

This year nineteen and eight we hunted with small bow and arrows, using unbrallow staves for arrows. It was most effective for forty feet, and acurate. We both could place a arrow in a six inch circle at that distance.

This year I only collected nuts, berry, herbs, grapes, flowers, muscadines. We killed some rabbits and three ground hogs. Down under Greens View I had an expereince I havent been able to decipher just why it has stayed with me, and how it came before me ten years later during a most perilous moment in my life.

At Gorman, Texas, I was persued to be mobbed. I was hemmed in like that groundhog. I had no choice except die fighting. To surrender would be certain death. So if I killed the sheriff I would die also. All I could do was pray for Gods help.

This groundhog came so vivid before me, and the words: He will walk away. Be brave. Be patient as you wont be harmed. The sheriff did walk away at that moment. The outcome of this came three hours later as you will read in “Texas.” I have no answer for this experience. I leave it to you.

Johnny was a Christian boy. We had a lot in common. He added a lot of happiness in my life.

My bodyguard business grew too. I was soon employed two nights a week to escort the ladies to different houses, and wait untill the bridge partys was over. For almost two years I was busy with my mountain collections and waiting on my white people. I rarely had anything to do with my colored people except on Sundays at Sunday School.

At this time we were blessed to have the fine Father sent to us named Stoney. He had a friend name Ambruster. These two men gave much time to training our young boys to be good athelethes. Father Stoney liked me very much. He knew much of my troubles. He often talked to me. He encourged me to take care of my mama. He also tried to get me to go to St. Marys to school. He and Ambruster would coach our two teams, both football and baseball. We had the best teams of colored in the South.

At this time we had all kinds of intertainments—cake walks, minstrals, concerts. Fisk University and Meharry teams were invited to come and play with us. The whole town would turn out to see us play.

The summer of nineteen and eight Ann came back to Sewanee on a visit. She bought a goat and wagon, the most beautiful goat I ever saw, from some turist that was here. The wagon was a exact copy of the Tenn. Wagon Co. She gave it to me so I could rent it out to the children at twenty five cents per hour. This would earn a dollar a day. I was in business now.

I worked Billy for two seasons. I made many friends among the tourists. Billy and I had our pictures take many times every day. Our pictures went to every city in the South.

After the summer season I done a wood yard business cutting stove wood, selling to all the colored people twenty cents a load. I would haul clothes, spring water. I met many fine people. Many of them wanted me to go away with them.

This all ended at the end of nineteen and nine. That fall I had been confronted with two experiences that left a memory that was hard to forget.

All of my trade was at the hotel. One morning a tall blond man came to me and told me he wanted me to ride his daughter every morning for a month. He said his name was Fletcher. He was from Ohio. His daughter was named Nancy. She was the sweetest child I had served. He and his wife both were so kind. After a couple of weeks he paid fifty cents each day.

One morning he ask me a lot of questions, all about who my father was. I refused to answer anything. This day he gave me a dollar. He ask would I come Sunday morning and ride Nancy. I agreed.

I always shined shoes on Sunday morning. While I was waiting Mr. Fletcher came out on the veranda and said: You will have to wait a while for Nancy. He saw I had my shine box. He said: You can shine my shoes while you are waiting. I shined his shoes. He went in the hotel. While I was putting the polish back in the box one of the bell hops named Aldridge came to me cursing me, saying: You have no right to hustle shines here in this hotel. Then he kicked me so hard that I tumbled down the steps on the sidewalk. I wasnt able to get up on my feet.

He threw my shine box down to me just as Mr. Fletcher came out of the hotel. He saw Arldridge throw my box down the steps. When he saw I was hurt, he ask me: Didnt that nigger kick you down those steps? Tell me the truth. You are hurt. Ill kick him all over the hotel. I said: No, I fell down the steps. He ask: Please tell me the truth. I saw him throw your shine box down. You are telling a white lie. I had learned that a Negro didnt have a chance at fighting a white man in the South, so I refused to tell the truth. I was so crippled I had to go home. All I hoped for was that when I was big enough I would beat Arldredge up myself.

The next morning I was back. Mr. Fletcher came to me and said: I want you to take me to your foster mother. I know you are a orphan. Bishop Gailor is your Godfarther. I want to adopt you and take you to Cleveland with me. I want to give you a chance, and a education. You are a fine boy, too fine to be here where you dont have a chance. I said: No, I have to take care of Mama. She needs me. He said: I want to talk to her. He said: Come, we go to see her now.

He ask mama if she would let me go to Cleveland with him. He would adopt me and train me to be a fine servant of a edecated class. I would be sent to school, a Episcopal school, where I would recieve training like all young men of all races. He told her: The boy is a Christian. My wife and daughter is most fond of the boy. He is ambitious. I know he is a orphan, and is a descendant of a white family of English. He said: I have a complete history of the boy. He needs a chance. He will make a fine man. I will give him the best education that can be given. I have permission from both of his concelmans, and his family on the white side. You are the only one to give your consent.

He said: Mattie, you have done a fine job teaching him to be a Christian and to work. I learn he is resentful of many things that the colored people call him. He wont go to school. You see if he was away from here he would soon forget about these insults. If you will let me take him, I will compensate you, as I hear he helps you very much. We just like the boy. There are many people that wants to help him. Will you let him go with me? I am secure financhly.

Mama burst out crying, holding her apron up to her eyes, saying: Its like giving away my own. Ive learned to love him like my own. I just cant say yes. I promised his mother as she was dying that I would do my best. If he wants to go I wont stand in his way. She turned her back.

I hadnt ever seen Mama cry like this. Suddenly I realized she loved me. I went to her, as she had bent over the ironing board, crying as if her heart was breaking. I told her I couldnt ever leave her. She soon gained controll of herself, then said: Mr. Fletcher, give us time to think it over. He smiled and said: I understand.

Then he said to me: Are you going back to the hotel with me? We left. On the way he ask me was the colored people here good to me. I didnt lie this time. I said: Some of them. I love them. He said: I know that yesterday you told a white lie to protect that dirty skunk that kicked you. Anybody that would harm a inocent boy like you need to be punished. You are just loyal. I like loyalty. Thats why I want to help you. Then he said: You must go to school.

At the hotel Mrs. Fletcher and Nancy was waiting on the veranda when we arrived. She ask quickly was I going home with them. Mr. shook his head, no. That was the last of that. They kept me around untill time for Nancy to take her nap. They taken many pictures of Billy, Nancy, and I. When they told me good bye, he gave me a five dollar bill, telling me to always be a Christian and obey Farthers advice. I never saw these wonderful people again.

This month of August had been a profitable month for me. I made over thirty dollars. From the ten dollars Mr. Fletcher had given me we were able to pay all of our due bills from the panic year of ninteen and seven. Mama and I counted our money we had left after all bills were paid. We had almost twenty dollars. This put us in good shape for the winter.

Two days later I went to the hotel with Billy. There were no children to ride. Everybody was leaving. The vacation was over.

As I started home I met a blond lady and a boy and a girl. The little girl ran to me, asking could she pat the goat. She caught me by the hand laughing and holding to my hand, saying: I like you. Then the boy came to me. It seemed they wanted to be close to me. I ask would they like to take a ride. The girl ask me to hold her in my arms so she could pat the goat on his back. I did.

The lady stood a distance from us just looking. I hadnt seen her for several years. Once in a toy store she told the owner to let me have anything I wanted and charge it to her. I had ask the storekeeper who she was, but he didnt tell me.

I put them in the wagon. The lady said: Dont go very far. I will wait here. On our return the girl didnt want to get out. When I attempted to lift her she clung to me, saying: I dont want to go. The lady came to us, saying: Ely has to go home so let him go. The girl still held on. This seemed to vex the lady.

As she came to us and tell the girl to turn me aloose, I was laughing. She put her hand in my hair, clenching my hair with a shake, and said: Its a pity you are so close, and not, yanking the child out of the wagon, tossing me a half dollar, telling me to get going. I went on my way woundering what was wrong I had done.

I stopped at the Supply Store leaving Billy tied. When I came out, Sam Donell had taken Billy for a ride, making him run by pulling his tail. He ran him up and down the street untill he was winded and went to his knees. I was angry. I was crying. Sam call himself having a good time.

Henry Hoskins was the only person that told Sam he ought to be ashame of himself. As small as I was, I wanted to fight with Sam. He kept me away from him with his buggy whip. It was an hour before Billy could start home. This was the last day of my goat Taxy for two reasons.

When I got home I told Mama about the lady saying that it was a pity that I was so near and not, and how she clenched me in my hair, and how lovably the children were and the woman so different. Seemed she hated me. Mama kept ironing, didnt answer me.

I ask her again: What could be wrong that she didnt like me? All white people like me, Mama. She turned to me, looking most serious, and said: My son, you didnt know that was your auntie and your brother and sister you were riding. She meant that you were so near white and not.

I said: Mama, I will find some other way to make money. I wont be no servant for my brother and sister. I wont be their nigger. This was the first time Mama didnt scold me for refusing to be a nigger. I told her how Sam had missused Billy. I am going to protect everything I own from now on if I have to die trying. Ill get even with Sam when I am older.

She said: No, dont think of fighting with white people. A Negro just dont have a chance. I dont want you to have that in your mind. Jack Prince was here today. He wants you to go and see Ned. He said Ned is in a bad way. He is losing a lot of his hogs and cows by not keeping sober enough to milk and feed them. Since his wife had left him he has been going down.

I reminded her today that I will be sixteen years old in two weeks. I will be ready for a gun. She said: Not if you talk about fighting. The shot gun that Aunt Charlotte gave you, its yours on your birthday. I was so happy that she had consented.

I went to see Johnny McKay and we had a long talk. He was glad I didnt go to Cleveland. We made plans how we would rove the mountains now.

It would be another month before we could gather nuts, although we spotted every tree from Roarks Cove to Tick Bush, where chesnuts, scaly barks, walnuts, and grapes grew. By Dec. I had sold twenty five dollars worth of nuts to the school boys. Many times I traded nuts to the students for clothes, then sell them to colored people. It was all business. I was most busy doing bodyguard two nights a week, selling candy on Saturday afternoon, cutting wood for my twelve custermers, delivering what washing Mama could do, untill school was out for the winter.

I had no income except wood selling. I spent much time with Grandpa, trying to stop him from drinking. I soon found me being around him helpt him a lot. He straitened up a bit for the next six months.

Jack Prince ask me to come and help his son Henry hew cross ties at fifty cents a day. He also let me have a rifle, thirty two Winchester, for five dollars. I could pay fifty cents a week. I didnt like the muzzle loading shot gun at all. When it was raining sometime it wouldnt explode.

Every day for three months for an hour Jack would practice shooting and instructing me how to shoot. I was shooting jam up with him at the end. We were cutting cardboard at forty feet away. He was most proud of my ability, often said I would be the best rifleman the mountains had seen. In the next few years he tried to keep me around him all he could.

One afternoon I was coming home from a hunt. I heard Magbys dog barking at the end of the graveyard, and pigs were squealing. This was at the corporation fence. I went to see if it was our pigs. Instead they were Jack Princes. Henry, Jacks son, rushed up, snatching my rifle from me, killing the constable Magbys dog. This dogs job was to keep hogs out of the corporation. The dog had killed two of Princes pigs.

Two weeks later I was suspoenad to court to witness for Jack Princes behalf, not knowing I was to lie by swearing that Magbys dog bit Henry. Magby was sueing them for killing his dog. I was presured by the Prince family that if I was their friend I would swear in their behalf. I felt I should do anything for them.

It didnt bother me untill I was called to witness. The Judge ordered me to put one hand on the Bible and repeat: I swear to tell truth, all truth, so help me God. I could not answer him. Mrs. Prince rushed to me and said: Say yes. Then the Judge ask: Did you see Henry Prince shoot the dog and the dog bite Henry? I just couldnt speak. I bowed my head. He said: Go to your seat.

I went out of the courthouse to the yard. I was hurt to think I had lied to God. My lie won the case for them. I eluded the Prince family for two months.

When Grandpa tried to suiside by taking “Rough on Rats” poison my little brother found him not too late. The Dr. saved him. Jack heard about it. He came to the house. He called me aside, saying: The old polecat has suffered a lot. Thats why I told you to stick close to him. You know he is a fine man. He is one of my best friends. Then he said: Red Horse (This was the name Grandpa called me), my door is always open to you. If the worse should happen you have me to come to any time. These words touched me deeply. At this moment I forgot all about my resentment I had held against the Princes.

I went home with Jack and had supper with his family. This was the beginning of the greatest friendship of a poor white family I ever had. They were so democratic that I never felt like a nigger or bastard when I was around them. He asked me would I help him do some castrating pigs. I could hold them while he operate on them. I was glad to help as I wanted to learn as much of veternerian work as I could.

I went back to Grandpas house to find he was resting easy. A friend of his feed and milk the three cows. My Aunt Ada had come to care for him. He snapped out of his regrets the next few days, and lived almost two years before he died a natural death. I spent many nights with him.

There wasnt much happines for me. Just to sell small bits, and salt rising and beaten biscuts for Mama to a few people left in town.

The clock smith was a colored man name Jim Jones who cook at St. Lukes building. He repaird clocks in his spare time. He was much different from the other colored people. He never taken part in no amusement. He was always busy. He liked me. He advised me to learn a trade. He suggested I should learn to repair shoes so as to have somthing to do at all times.

Here I went into the village to the shoe shop asking the owner could I stay around and watch him work. I would keep the shop cleaned up. After ten days I bought a last, half soled two pair of my own shoes which I exhibited cutting the price to where I could profit—fifteen cents; pair of shoes. This caused me to make five dollars this winter.

This spring of nineteen and nine was the most wounderful years for the next three year I believe in the history of the Rome of the South, Sewanee. We came forward with championship meterial, both football and baseball. We servants champt over all colored teams. The S.M.A. also came forward with fine atheletes such as Jinx Gillam, Captain Gillams son. He and Jack Sneed was the spark plug of the S.M.A. team. They trounced all prep schools of the South, while the Varsity had been presented with such great atheletics as Lex Stone, Faulkenberry, Sike Williams, Eric Cheap, Aubery Lanier, MacMilliam, Johnny Greer, and their spark plug Chigger Brown, Ward, and Fox. In their three years, I beleive all of the men received All-Southern honours. I too as a mascot, because they let me wear a white sweater with a purple S on it. Chigger Brown, my idol, gave it to me. I hustled the bat for baseball and carried the bucket of water with oatmeal on a sponge at foot ball. Once they taken me with Six to Nashville. I learned to massage arms and feet. This experience, and learning to make leniment of birch oil and witch hazel, also helpt me to aid Mama with rheumatisim. I didnt have to buy much Sloans Liniment any more.

This year I gaind another friend, Happy Gilliam, Jinx Gilliams younger brother. He donated me all of his offcast of clothes. I became to be the best dressed colored boy in the town. I still had my troubles with the poor white trash and the dislike of some of the Negros. I was now growing up near as big as the ones older than I. This mountain exircise was developing me rapidly.

I was keeping customers supplyed with chalybeate water, flowers, berrys, pawpaw apples. Jack had taught me how to defang the rattlesnake for a month. He would be harmless. If I couldnt catch them without risk, I would kill them and skin them and tan the skin to make vest fronts or belts, which the students would buy.

Those over thirty inches the circus would buy them at two dollars a peice. My dogs become to track the rattler.

This caused me to kill many of them. I had two cigar boxes of rattles I left at home when I left. Many students sported vests of rattlesnake skin as a modish dress.

Father Stoney and Ambrester was spending a lot time with the colored people teaching us to be atheletics, coaching the teams. Their faverates was Yum Yum, Simon and Houston Smith. These boys was real league meterial. I wasnt developed to compete with these men. I concentrated on boxing.

The fall of nineteen and ten Father Tyson, who presided over St Agustus, sent for me to come to see him. He told me he was buying a pack of hounds from the Mississippi kennels. They were English hounds. He wanted me to be his hunting guide and trainer for those dogs.

He explained to me I could start my own kennel of breeding. He would give me a pair of thoroughbreds. I had already began raising fox terriers that people had pursued them as far as Nashville. Attorney Crownover had bought two pups from me. I taken up his offer.

He had a colored butler named Zemma Hill. He was training under Father Tyson to be a minester of the Babtist faith. He become to be the pastor of the Edgefield Babtist Church of Nashville, Tenn., for at least thirty years, one of the most reputated ministers of the Negro race in the South.

We would run and drag a coonskin through woods, so Father and the dogs would follow up the trail. This caused me to forget every other method of making money. This was what I wanted to be in the mountains.

Father taught me to make carbide lamps. We manifactured our own as there were no flashlights. These lights were only used when we had treed a animal. With a lens of magnyfying glass it was good for twenty five yards. We could search a tall tree easely.

For two months we didnt tree a coon. Paying up to five dollars I had bought every dog that I was told that could tree a coon. Grandpas dogs had been stolen and had died. There just wasnt no coon dogs in town.

This was a year of many changes. I began to feel like I was a man. I was busy as ever. Houston Smith had taken up the bodygaurd work. I didnt want that work any more, working as I was with the atheletics, in the mountain and hunting, trying to learn to be a barber, shoe repair.

Father Tyson had equipt a work shop for his two oldest boys. He had bought three horses for them. I could use one any time I wanted. He had eleven children. I was told he was a wealthy man. He was very fond of me, and like to take walks when I was around. He gave me a compass. He taught me to read the stars such as the Dipper. The only guide I had on foggy nights was the Breslin Tower chimes. It would be heard in the canyons as far as four miles in the still of the night.

He was the one that explained to me that fur business was being operated, and I could sell all kinds of skins. He wrote to St. Louis to the fur commissioners and secured a price list. This started me to trapping and hunting every minute in the season. For the next two years the mountains was my home.

I first attempted to buy furs from the mountaineers. Not knowing what I was doing, I got stuck on my first deal. I had to lose fifteen dolars on a twenty five dollar deal. I bought them on credit. I tried to explain that the skins were too old, showing them the report. It made no difference to them. I had made a bargan. I must pay them when I got the money. I knew I had to have the friendship of these people if I expected to fare well in these mountains.

As I left Tom Langs house that afternoon I went up to the summit close to Shake Rag Hollow. I heard pigs squealling. I dismounted and sneaked around the shoulder of the canyon thinking it was a fox tantilizing them, only to find it was old man Wat Cannon, who Grandpa had call him a hog rustler. He had found this sow and six pigs. He had hayed the sow by feeding her corn. He was marking the pigs with his mark.

This sow belong to Grandpa. I was within forty feet of him before he saw me. I yelled at him, asking him why was he marking our pigs. He stood looking at me for a moment, then ask: Are you old Neds grandson? I said: Yes. He was a old man. His whiskers was almost to his belt. He laughted, and said: Son, you know my eyes are failing. I was sure that sow had my mark on her. I had heard that whenever he was caught in this act this was his excuse.

Then he said: I have heard that you are pretty dam cocky to be a nigger. You had better drop a buttonhole lower if you expect to rove these mountains. He got on his old gray mare and started to ride away.

When he saw my two dogs that was yoked togather, he came back to me, asking where did I get those dogs. He said: I will give you twenty dollars for them. Those are the finest dogs I ever saw. I said: They are not for sale. I am going to make coon dogs out of them. Do you know anybody that has a good coon dog that I can buy? He got off his horse, and went to the dogs, examined them, then said: I got to have this male dog. I tell what I will do. I will trade you the smartest coon dog in Tenn. and give five dollars at the boot for that dog. You see that sheperd dog there? He is the best coon dog in these mountains. I am getting too old to hunt at night. If he dont do what I say he will, you bring him back to me. I will give you your dog back, and you can keep the five dollars. This will make up for my mistake with the pigs.

It was hard to give up Heck as the two dogs were so beautiful as a team. I wanted the old mans friendship. I agreed. This was the best trade I ever made. The old man and I became to be close friends. He gave me many advises of where good hunting was found.

This dog was eight year old. He had caught so many wild hogs all his teeth was gone except his four tushes. He had gashes all over his body from cuts by wild hogs.

I went strait to Farther Tyson, telling him about this dog. We went hunting that night. Shep treed two coons. This inspired us and our dogs.

This was the beginning of the finest pack of hunting dogs I have ever heard of. Wild hogs, squirrells, posums, coons—we never lost not one trail for the rest of the time we hunted, as you will see. Shep treed over three hundred dollars worth of fur in the next two years. We often had hunting partys that would join us to see these dogs work. Father Tyson hunted just one night a week. After that I had to hunt alone. No colored people wanted to bunt. Johnnys mother and Happys didnt want them out after nine oclock. These boys were in S.M.A.

Schools had changed. Summer was the vacation period. Having this fine tree dog was the answer to all of my prayers. The mountains was my home now. The Negros and the white trash could have the town. Just dont bother me. Every way things changed. Mama began to be closer. I was almost her full suport. Her son that wasnt married was coming down with poor health. Two or three dollars a week I made kept us eating.

I must tell this ghost story. I was discouraged by or attempted to be, by many of the Negros, telling I would be found dead in the mountains. I was told of two places that a ghost had run hunters away. I had accepted it as a joke after Father Stoney told me there was no such thing as a haunt. He said people who supported fear might beleive anything. This was the first time I had heard this phrase: That fear was mans worse enemy.

The third night I started to Proctors Hall to go down the mountain where there was a trail. As I passed the Palmer home I thought of the ghost story I had heard.

There had been a lady name Nancy Bannon. She had been a victim of a fire. She was found in the ruins. Everybody pondered over this, as a mystery that she didnt escape the fire. Some fox hunters dogs struck a trail just past the Palmer home that lead to a hickory tree on hill four hundred yards away. The dogs acted so misterious, leaping in the air, snapping at the air. The men ran away, claiming it was a ghost. Also they claim they heard a woman screaming up this tree. No one hunted in this area because of this rumor.

A hundred yards past the Palmer home my dogs struck a hot trail that caused them to bay at this lone tree on top of the hill. When I got to the tree the dogs was so excited they were gnawing the bark on the trunk of the tree. I was sure we had a coon. Soon I could see there was nothing.

The moon was high and bright. I could see everything to the top of the tree, and it was a tall one. It wasnt close to any other trees. Just then the ghost story came to my mind. I decided I would climb the tree to prove to the dogs they had lied. The same performance I had heard of began. The dogs leaped in the air, snapping at somthing, running to the woods, yelping like they saw something above them. I could feel cold chills down my back. I knew I was seeking somthing I couldnt see.

While I was trying to find the answer, they came rushing back up to the tree on a hot trail, and bayed again. I was so puzzled. I decided I would climb the tree. I knew that nothing had come by me. At that moment the dogs began leaping in the air and racing down the hill, yelping. I decided if I have stay here all night I am going know what this is.

Then I decided to build a fire on the dark side of the tree. I gathered some dead wood. As I was stacking it beside the tree. I heard the dogs coming toward me on a hot trail. Just then I felt somthing run up my leg to the top of my head and leapet off to the tree. I just glimsed it going up the tree. I thought it was a mouse.

The dogs crashed against me, leaping up the side of the tree. As I backed away, I saw Shep was standing twenty feet from the tree as if waiting like he did for a coon to jump from the tree, as he knew their habits to intercept them. Suddently the dogs leapet up as before and ran down the hill, all except Shep.

I saw he was shaking somthing he was holding in his mouth. I made him drop it, to find it was a flying squirrel. They had a den in the hollow of this tree. They would come up hill on foot, would leap off the tree and glide down to the other trees. Shep had solved the habit, and caught it as he opened his wings to glide. Mr. Judd had told me the flying squirrel was kin to the bat. Both belong to the mice family. Here I knew the ghost story was a hoax. As soon as I let each dog smell of it they were under control again. We went on our hunt.

The next morning, I told the story and displayed the squirrel at the barber shop of Hugh Hills. Prof. Norton, General Colmore, Mr. Judd was there getting their grooming done. I was congratulated by the notables for being brave enough to weather the experience I had, to solve the mystery. This become to be the town gossip. I was sure that I had nothing to fear in the mountains.

Solving the next ghost hoax came a year later. This one created hate. Here trouble started.

The next afternoon I was going to the village to buy cartridges. Grandpa was on a bender. He was arguing with two younger men in front of Pinks pool hall. He was well loaded. When he was in this condition he could be very nasty.

The men didnt know I was his grandson as they hadnt been living here very long. One decided he would give Grandpa a beating. He started to hit him with a broken cue stick. I had walked up back of Grandpa. He hadnt seen me. He was abusing these men.

One struck at the old man, barely missing his head as Grandpa staggered back. I rushed toward them with my rifle on the man, telling if he hit Grandpa I would kill him. They retreated. Getting Grandpa in a sulky I carried him home. He boasted as usal when drinking of what a terror he had been, how many men he had killed, and that I was a chip off the old block, just like him.

Getting him in the house I unhitched the horse, looking around to see how things had deminished around him—only a few chickens, a few hogs, the old horse underfed, looking like death gnawing on a cracker. I become to feel the hurt or regrets he was carrying.

As soused as he was, he asked me to stay a while with him. After drinking two cups of his strong coffee he sobered up a bit. Then he began telling me about his troubles and how people had decieved him, robbed him. How they had broken up his family. I would have to help protect him. I was all he had. And dont let nobody take nothing from you. Make people respect you like you did today.

It seemed he had lost interest in everything. Revenge was all he was thinking of. Now and then he would make boasts about how tuff he had been, and me knowing he hadnt ever hurt anyone in his life, except himself.

I ask: Why dont you pray, Grandpa? God will help you. He said: I just cant get it. I dont say there is not a God, but I dont get this Reserection. Father Estern and Father Claiborne talks to me. I just cant get it. I know you are a Christian. You have to be, the way these niggers have treated you because a white man is your daddy. And its not your fault. Dont let them kick you around any more, being a Christian or no Christian. I want you to be a man among men like me. Dont have no boss. Make your own job.

You and Adline are the best looking nigger gal and boy in Sewanee. You get closer to her. Dont let no dude nigger pull her down. She is the prettiest white gal in Sewanee, if she do have to be called a nigger. Your Aunt Ada is going to need help with her. I dont go about her. I dont like that husband of hers. I will shoot him if I catch him beating her. You do it too. He is just mean and a bully. Dont let him bully you around. Remember this. Dont talk about nothing that you hear from the mountaineers. They all like old Ned because I dont talk. You will get along well in the mountains.

This was the first time Grandpa had let me talk back to him. He ask me to bring him a possum every week. It was four oclock when I said I must be going. He was pushing the embers off the Dutch oven. There he had a big possum and sweet potatoes for his dinner.

Then he said: I want you to remember this. There is a cave a little ways from Poplar Springs. It has been filled up by the Indians years ago. There is a treasure hid there. My spirits has told me. There is a hole in the ground. It take a rock some time to hit bottom. You are big enough to go down in it. We will do that when Spring comes. He said: Wat Cannon stopped by two days ago. Told me about you trying to stop him from marking my pigs. He claimed be thought they were his. I know he was lieing. But the hog hustler aint too bad. He is a friend to the nigger. His family had a plantation over in that Sherwood valley and he and two other brothers stands by their ex-slaves. You will hear some hellfire storys about how they have defended one of their niggers. His name is Alf Cannon.

Grandpa said: Whatever you hear, dont talk it to no niggers. He told me he traded you a good coon dog. He said he tried to bluff you, but you told him you had a right to protect your Grandpas property. He said I like that boy. He is willing to give and take Thats why I traded my dog. He means right. He said: He and Jack Prince are the best friends you can have.

I left him carrying all of his regrets on my shoulder. This was the first and last talk we ever had man-to-man. A few weeks later Grandpa died suddenly from hemoriges. I was his heir with my brother and cousin.

After Grandpas burial there were many bills to be paid. I assumed all the debts I would pay in time, which was fourteen dollars. This kept his farm from mortage. I now have twenty eight dollars I must pay some way.

Studying my fur list I found that skunks was highest priced fur around, blacks as much as two fifty a piece. I killed and skinned everything had hair on it, except dogs. House cats went with everything else. I wasnt allowed to stay in the house when I had caught skunks at night. I would sleep in the barn with the dogs. As cold as it was we huddled together and slept warm.

I found two caves in the mountains where I bedded leaves, stacked wood. Here we would stay till morning. By February the tenth I had trapped and caught one hundred and seventy pieces of skins.

I shipped them to F.C. Taylor Company, hoping I would get back enough to pay my bills. The check came. I couldnt believe it was true—the amount. I went to Mr. Brooks. He ran the big grocery store, he and his two sons, Bert and Preston. They were so kind to we colored People. I ask him to tell me how much was this check. As he looked at the check, he said: Jimmingy Chrismas! Where did you get a check for this amount of money? Mat wont have to worry about her bills. What did you do to get this amount of money? This is eighty seven dollars and seventy cents.

I ask: Will you cash it and take out what Mama owe you? He said: I dont have that kind of money here. You take it to the bank tomorrow. Money was still scarce from the script years of ninteen seven and eight. I went to Mama and showed her the check. From this time on it seemed that the skunk oder was the most welcome around home. I didnt have to stay in the caves unless I just wanted to, which I often done. I paid all of my bills, gave Mama twenty five dollars to buy her a coat suit and high top shoes. I gave her sick son ten dollars to buy medicine. This left me twenty dollar to buy amunition and steel traps.

Over fifty pieces of skins were no good, such as rabbits, weasels, ground hogs. The coons and skunks paid off. I had six weeks more to hunt. I made every day and night count.

The next week I had the most narrow escape of my life of all of my experience in the mountain. I had drilled many honey holes for coons at the waterfall under Morgan Steep, which was our swiming hole. There was a log with one end in the swimming hole. I drilled a honey hole in the log on the end out of the water.

When I came around the edge of the cliff, I didnt see the coon. He evidently slid down on the other side so I couldnt see him. After I had scanned around the edge of the ledge to the top of the water fall, I looked back to see the tail of a coon hanging down at the end of the log. I had to go back on the trail ledge of the water fall.

I heard crashing and rumbling up the canyon. There was a cracking of timber. I stopped and stood against the end of a big boulder. Soon I saw a avalanch of folidge rolling over the waterfall. Then a pillar of water fifteen feet high drop over the fall with a churning motion sending stones and logs in all direction.

Everything around me was vibrating. The water rose up twenty feet during the churning. I clung to the boulder as water raced around waist deep. The water rushed down the mountain as quickly as it came. I soon sensed Hodsons Dam had broken. This was the first time that I become to know God had his arms around me.

I stood by this boulder which I had sat on many times meditating my troubles, and one time had believed my mother had come from Heaven and talked to me. To me seeing the coon tail was a miracle. I couldnt have escaped this forty foot chasm.

The coming summer we had a larger swiming hole. The log had been lifted out of our way. Many times I had dived off the log to get coins the students toss in to see me dive and find them. I claim this spot as my waterfall. Here I taken shower baths before other people had the accomdation.

The game became to be scarce in Roark Canyon and Greens View. I shipped all my skins the first of April, recieving sixty dollars.

I began loaning money on guns, watches, rings, and stick pins to men that gambled—ten cents on the dollar by the week. They all were paid first of the month. The most I loaned was three dollars on anything.

This was when I got a pistol. I liked a thirty two speed. I bought it from a piana player. This was when I began to learn to fight with a pistol. I had read many detective storys of Nick Carter. I was going to be a mountain law man some day, And I meant to be good.

I went to Jack Prince asking him to teach me to shoot a pistol like him. He used a forty five. My arms were too small for a gun that heavy. He had told me this before. He said if I would buy the ammunition he would teach me all I need to know. He liked to pratice any time. I spent many hours with Jack practicing for the next eight months. In the afternoons I went to the varsity team baseball. I would chase balls. There were several colored men that pratice with them. They would hire our pitchers to pitch to the training men. This spring was the last of the greatest teams I had seen Sewanee produce. This squad of men were the most humanitorian young men I have ever known.

Houston Smith and I learned all of our ball playing experience from praticing as service from them. Sike Williams, our varsity pitcher, taught me to twirl. I done very well. This year was Jinxs Gillams sophomore year with the varsity team. As pitcher he was a sensation. He had more speed than any pitcher they had seen in many years. He hadnt lost a game untill Georgia University came to play the Tigers. They won two out of three. Sike Williams won his game. Jinxs was knocked out of the box. We had expected Gillam to shut Georgia out.

I was told by the colord trainer of Georgia that his team had hired four of the speediest colored pitchers in Georgia to pitch to their team so as to be good against Gillam. It paid off. This was the last game I saw of these fine atheletics. Georgia won two to one.

During the series Chigger Brown stole four bases. He was for two years the greatist base stealer in the conference. The batting trio was Chigger Brown, lead off man, Aubrey Lanier, Lex Stone was the clean up. Lex Stone was the Bambeno. For the years as these great heros of the gridiron and ball diamond, my enthusiasm went with them. I knew the history they had made would never be forgotten in Sewanee.

Everything boomed in Sewanee this year. There were more attandent of young ladies during Commencement than ever. The turkey-trot step had just come out. The students all danced to the tune of the song You Beautiful Doll. Adline my cousin and I went to see all the fraternity dances so we could pratice them.

This year the selected most hansome student was named King. He was the first baseman on S.M.A. team. This was the ladies decision.

Many students remained in Sewanee during vacation. Their familys came as turists. The lodging problem become to be a bit acute. The Hotel opened first of June. Students from Fisk University and Meharry came to work with many help from the Side Batton Hotel at Nashville.

Mont Eagle was like Sewanee. Many tourist brought nurses. One chauffeur came. He was the first Negro I had seen driving a automobile. His people were friends of the Hodgson family. He told me that the sagers at Pelham had thrown rocks at him as he drove through. There were many automobiles came through our town. George Quintard was the only student that owned a car. He let me ride with him any time I was going his direction. He liked me. One time he said he was going to take me with him when he left school.

I went to work for Mr. Colmore. Miss Dora Colmore, his daughter, said she was going to teach me to be a English butler. I worked three hours morning, same in the evening. Rev. Harry Colmore came this year from Cuba to visit his farther with his family.

This was the first time I felt like I was sombody. They were so patient and kind to me. The teaching I recieved this nine months I never forgot. It gave me some of the greatest oppotunitys years later in the outer world.

The only part of the job I objected to was pumping the vacum while Miss Dora ran the nozzle. This I would have to do on Friday. She encourage me to be clean and imaculate. I bought nice clothes, dressed every day to go to work. For the first time I was really happy. This didnt pay like hunting and trapping. My salary was ten dollars a month. I also shined shoes, carried laundry for Mama. She had all she could do. There were some new colored familys had moved in to work.

As I were not popualer with the boys and girls here, I ask my cousin Adline to go with me to a big dance that was taking place for the colledge girls and boys from Mont Eagle hotels who were coming here to be with other coledge students. We both would be eighteen in Sept. I bought her a organdy evening gown for seven dollars, bought myself blue coat, white pants, pump slippers, purple tie and soxs like the Sewanee students wore.

We were the youngest at the dance. When we finished our first dance then many of the coledge boys came to me thinking Adline was my sister, wanting to meet her. We both were good dancers. These student boys become much excited over the beauty of Adline. They came to me introducing themselves, asking to meet her.

I met all the girls and chapperrones. We were annexed to them for the rest of the summer. Didnt anybody speak about a bastard. Instead we were call the best looking girl and boy in Sewanee.

This was when dateing started with me. All of the ladies was a year or two older than I. It didnt make any difference with them. They wanted to date. I was kept busy. Adline fell in love and got married.

This year Sewanee had two colored baseball teams—first nine and second nine. The older players was the first nine. It was one of the best teams in Tennessee for the last three years. All of them worked for the University. Both white and colored was proud of this team. The players have long been remembered: Noble Phillips, Yum Yum, Joe Arldredge, Bud Arldredge, Cul, Tommy Davis, Fred Bryant, John McFarland, Walter Wooten, Billy Childress, Scott Davis, Strike Arldredge, John Knuckles, Abb Arldredge, Willie Six, he played and was trainer. Hugh Hill managed.

These men had been coached by the varsity coaches. They were realy professional ball players without a league name. When some of them were sick and others didnt care to travel, Hugh decided to replace as a reserve. He taken we four boys, Houston Smith, Simon Smith, Simp Bonner, and I, that had worked and trained with the Varsity team. We four hadnt played with the second nine. This way we would still have two teams. I was a good fielder. Showed promise as a pitcher. Simp was same as I. Simon was a fine catcher. Houston was a first baseman and a top batter. All four was good at the bat. On the Fourth of July we taken our first trip to South Pittsburg, Tennessee, a coke oven and steel foundry town. It was a sporty little burg, a good laboring town like Birmingham for colored people. They had one of the best ball clubs around. The white people was fond of this team.

This was the first automobile race I saw. Three striped cars raced down the street for a mile. This was the only street over four blocks long. We could see them as they pass by. After that it was ten minutes before you could see across the street for the dust. We had a good time.

That night they were having a prize fight. No Negros were allowed to attend. I wanted to see a prize fight. A colored boy I had known at Bridge Port, one of the boys had run me down when I was running from the shouting Negros. His name was Pete Hill. He worked at a livery stable next to the building where the fight was to be up on the second floor. He told me we could climb on top of the stable and look though the window. It was a good fight. I decided that I was going to be a fighter. Jack Johnson had just beat Jim Jefferis for the championship. This was the only game that a Negro could compete with a white man. Coming back home I had more to tell than any one else.

Two weeks later we were invited to Fayetteville, Tennessee, to play. I had noticed there were many half-white Negros, more of them than dark ones. I had wondered if they were bastards. During the game one of our men cleated the second baseman. This started a fight. The law rushed in to stop it. While we were listening to the advice of the law, four middle-age white men said to us as they pointed to some of their players, saying: Thats my son. If you hit them with a bat Ill kill all you Sewanee niggers.

The game got underway. There was no way for us to win, because the white people on the sideline refereed the game. The umpire mostly waited for their decision. It was something for me to think about. I was Sewanees only half-white bastard. I had to fight all alone. This was my last trip with the team. I played when visiting teams came. We didnt hold any hard feeling against the Fayetteville people for their way of wanting to win. I remember that earlier, in ninteen and eight, Fisk University came to play our team. Sewanee was leading by one touchdown nearing the end of the last period. Fisk was driving for the goal, first down on the ten yard line. They stalled there. It was impossible to penetrate the human wall of Sewanee. I saw Grandpa, Henry Woods, Pink Sims, and some white students was helping back up Sewanees line. When the gun sounded, Fisk was still on the ten yard line. This is some of how the Negro played ball down South fifty five years ago. No matter how it ended, it was just a matter of sport. No one held a grudge, because nobody wanted to see their home town team lose. In all towns white people supported the colored ball players.

The first of September all of the tourist vacated. Hotels closed. All the schools would open on the fifteenth. I had met many good looking girls. For a few days I felt a bit lonely, knowing how the stigma of bastardy hung over me where the girls and boys around me. All fun ended.

For the next two months I had to be busy. Winter wood had to be gotten in and cut into stove wood to supply my customers, at least eight wagon loads. Henry Prince was to haul it for a dolar a load if I cut and help load. Joe Willis would help saw it at fifty cents a day. This amount would supply for four months.

I had planned to make this winter a big success. I would start hunting and traping in November. I had two months to gather chestnuts, scaly barks, walnuts, wild grapes, muscadines, and herbs.

Chasing up and down mountains was a good training program for a boxer, as I had planned to be. Endurance was most important, I was advised. Father Stoney and Ambruster had encouraged me to do so. Father Stoney had become to be more of a counsler than Father Eastern with me. He advised me and encouraged me to become to be a boxer. He liked atheletics.

At night I could set pins at the bowling alley for three hours. I hadnt spoken of this enterprise. Dr. Joe Seldon had built the alley two years ago. His brother Doc Seldon operated it. The first tournement Jack Sneed barely missed bowling a perfect game which would awarded him a thousand dollar. As he tried for the tenth strike one pin reeled a bit and wouldnt fall. This was the highest record of bowling when I left Sewanee. Jack Sneed never came close to the record agan.

As you see I always had a chance to work. My whole ambition was to be strong and defensive. Fight seem to be my middle name. The bitterness I had carried for years was now ready to explode.

It seemed the day I was eighteen the world changed. September the eleventh, this being my birthday, I went to my Aunt Adas who had worked for Dr Richinson every since my mother had died. They lived on the estate like my mother had. Aunt Ada was alone when I arrived, telling her I am eighteen today.

She kissed me on the forehead and said: Do you know I have been waiting a long time for this day? You can have what Lena left with me when she died. No one know this except me. You are old enough to know how things were. After you were born, your father was kind to your mother. He gave her many things. He sent them to her by Aunt Henretta Ferris, who raised him as his old mama. She cooked for his family thirty years.

She ask: Do you remember the rings that your mother wore when she was burried? I said: Yes. She said: He sent them to her by Aunt Henretta. At the same time he sent what I have kept for you. She handed me a small chamos bag. There were a stickpin set with a engraved designed of Virgin Mary and Baby Christ, mounted in gold, a set of stud buttons and cuff links to match, all gold. He said you would be a Christian. Your name was taken from the Bible. Lena ask me to see that her rings would be on her fingers when she was buried. I kept them when she was so sick. I put them on her the morning she was put in the coffin. They were valueable. One was a ruby and diamond. The horse shoe ring was emeralds. Giving you this completes my sisters request. Do take care of them.

I ask her: Who is my farther? She said: That I dont know. Lena never told me. There were three sons in that family. Which one I dont know for sure. Aunt Henrietta is the only one that do know. She was your mothers closest friend. She wont tell you untill you are twenty one. This was much of the cause of me coming back to Sewanee years later. I speak of this in the return.

She ask me to go up to the house an see Mother Richardson. I went. As I walked in the parlor Mother was sitting by the window. I spoke, saying: Hello, Mother, as she was my Godmother. She said: My boy, I should spank you. Its been three years since you been to see me. Come closer. She held her spectackles by the handle, and said: You are a handsome boy. You sure favor. Thats all she said.

Dr. roused up from a nap as he was lying on the leather soffer: Where in the hell did you come from, you dam little scrapper? I ought to take my cane and tan your dam red hide. You know you are the only son Mama and I have. He said: Come here to me. I went to him, knowing he was going to tap me with his cane. After he had done that, he then began kidding me about when I was small.

They both were almost blind. I stayed a while with them. They told me that Bishop Gaitor wasnt pleased with me for not going to school. I left them telling them that I wouldnt stay away so long. That was the last time I saw my Godmother.

Going back to my auntie, Uncle Doss, her husband, had come home from his job on the railroad. He was drunk. He was beating on Auntie. I had heard he done this. Grandpa had told me to shoot him if I caught him in the act. He was so busy slapping her around he didnt hear me come. His pistol was lying on the table. I grabbed the gun, began snapping it at him. It wasnt loaded. I hit him on the head, knocking him down. I told him I would go and get my gun, and come back and kill him.

I ran home, got my gun, started back. Aunt Ada had stopped Charlie Roe and Tommy Davis, telling them to stop me. This they done, taking my gun away. It seemed that Mama and all of the family was down on me.

Two days later, I beat up two boys that had picked on my little brother. Their larger brothers beat me. I didnt have but four young colored boy friends in the town. Joe Willis was my best. He was helping me saw wood four days a week.

I was often tannilized by the larger boys, saying I was just a fluff. I was like my Granddaddy, a big boast. I wasnt going to shoot nobody. This caused me to hope some one would do anything to me so I could have a cause to shoot them. I was hopeing someone would call my bluff. It had to come. I was carrying my Grandfathers revenge as well as mine.

September the twenty fifth Mama ask me to go and get Dr. Lear to come and see my foster brother Scott. He wasnt able to go to Winchester to his Dr. he had been going to. I hadnt ask Mama what his complaint was. He had been ailing for a year. The doctor came. When he was leaveing he call me and said: Go and have that prescription filled. Tommorrow morning, you come to the hospital. I want to talk to you. No one at home said anything about Scotts complaint. Dr. Lear invited me to come into his office and sit. He said: I have to talk with you because you are the provider for Mat and family. Your brother Scott is suffering with syphilis. It is in the second stage. He has a chance yet to be cured. Why didnt you tell Dr. Seldon or I about it? I said: I didnt know of it.

Then he said: There is a new medicine that is produced in Germany called six-o-six. I havent used it. I will have to sent to the St. Louis labotorys to get it. The hospital dont furnish this type of treatment. Yore people will have to pay cash for it. Each shot will cost twenty five dollar. We will have to have at least three—if not more. There will be other medicine too. It will take six months to complete the course. How long will it take you to get seventy five dollars togather? You dont have to worry about my fee. That can come any time afterwards. All of the expenses wont be over a hundred and fifty dollars. This is his only chance to live. I dont want to start this treatment unless I am sure I can complete the course.

This seemed like a fortune to me when very few colored people earned over a hundred dollars a year. He said he could controll the ailment for at least a month. Dont talk to anybody about it. Mat your mama dont want no one to know about it. I left him, saying: I will let you know soon. I know I prayed all the way home.

I went to Mama. Told her what Dr. had told me. She said: I dont know where to turn to get that much money. If you hadnt tried to be such a man, and tried to shoot Doss, I might could borrow some money from Ada. They work the year round. This hurt to hear it that way. I told her I had twenty two dollars. She didnt know I had any money. She got the jar she kept her money in. We counted over twenty dollars she had saved from her laundry work. She said: I have been heping my son buy medicine and pay Dr. bill for a year. This is why I dont have any more. I told her that I had over twenty dollars owing to me for those watches, rings, and two pistols. I cant collect any of it untill the first of November as these men has just started back to work. Mama looked so worried as I hadnt seen her so let down. I said to her: Give me the twenty dollars. I will get this treatment some way. I am going to make that hundred and fifty dollars in the next six months. I am going to borrow some money from Mr. Colmore. Mama said: No, you will have to tell why you need it. I pledged I wouldnt tell any one. She gave me the money.

I pawned my rifle and jewelery to Hugh Hill for ten dollars. I taken the fifty to Dr. Lear the next morning asking him to start the treatment. I would have another twenty five by Thanksgiving. He smiled, saying: I know you will, Ely. I will send for the shots at once.

When I told Mama the deal I had made, for the first time she put her arms around me and said: You are the boy I hope you would be. We will get it payed some way. You see, you are the man of the family. I have to depend on you. This gave me a superior feeling that I was somebody. I dont know as if it helpt in one way—because of my bitterness I had carried. I was anxious to strike back at any one that had mistreated me. And there was a lot of them, young and older.

At this time of season it was a bit dull for me. For the next three weeks nuts and herbs I could start to collect. I explained to Mama my plans. I would work at the bowling alley every night untill hunting season, sell candy, crullers, and peanuts for Mrs. Beasley every afternoon at the ball practice, shine shoes Sunday moorings. The only time I wanted out was to go to Sunday School and church.

I had learned that the Negro and sager was much alike, looking for somthing for nothing. Each had taken from me trying to buy their friendship. All that Grandpa had told me seem to come to thought—protect everything you have, keep your money, dont be on your knees to nobody. Let people know you are a man.

I had no girl friend. The larger boys had shoved me away when I tried to walk along with the girls. This I wouldnt let be no more. My gun would answer to what my fist couldnt do.

By the twentyth of September I had four cords of stove cut and racked. I had a small tin wagon. I let the people that had wood cooking stoves come and get their wood at twenty cents a load. Mama looked after this, as she was crippling badly, couldnt stand on her feet to do washing. This paid two dollar a week untill in January. Every penny we got was put in the jar at the head of Mamas bed. We charged everything at the grocery. Dr. Seldon agreed he would pay me half a dollar each night at the alley. He said I was quicker setting pins than the other boys. I know he wanted to help me.

I was still beating up boys that picked on my brother. I was beaten up by John McFarland the first of October when I attempted to collect three dollars he had borrowed on his watch. He only wanted to pay the three dollars. He owed one dollar interest. I refused to let him have the watch. He knocked me down, taken his watch and kicked me about. He was much larger and older than I. He also was a bully.

I went home and got my shotgun, as I didnt have my rifle, and went to look for him. He saw me first and ran. I chased him, shooting at him. Many men tried to stop me. I would turn on them threating them not to interfear. I swore I would kill any one that touch me. There were at least twenty of them. They just look at me as if I was crazy.

That night John sent me my money. The next day I told every one that owed me that I meant to be paid. Everyone paid me. After this event very few people talked to me. No one tried to push me around.

The next Sunday at Sunday School Father Stoney gave me a severe lecture, alone, about my conduct. I walked along with the girls, laughed and kidded with them. All of the older boys just looked on. It seemed the girls were amused at what stand I had taken. This started them to flirt with me. This caused them to slip out at night and date me in secrecy. It seemed they didnt care to be in public with me. It seemed for the next six months that the young women and girls kept me busy dating—all in secret. I thought I was raising a fog, untill March. I was much elated to think how I was getting back at the older boys, as you will understand later.

By November the first I had stripped all of the ginseng beds, taking every particle of root, and the calmor root, quienine roots. I collected three pound of ginseng at seven dollars a pound, twenty pounds of the other roots. I sold them all for thirty two dollars at Winchester. This I paid Dr. Lear.

I abused everything I collected from. I sawed the limbs off the chesnut trees. The scaley barks the same way. I wanted every penny I could get and quick as possible, stripping the trees of every nut I could get. For twenty days I was in the mountains from six to eight hours a day—except Sunday and Saturdays. The only money I spent was to buy cartridges for my pistol. I practiced with it every day.

My dogs got exercise and training too. This was when I trained the two hushmouth dogs to be my bodygaurds. They would let me know when we were aproaching either man or animal a hundred yards away.

This year I collected black walnuts, ten sacks. Will Rae let me dump the walnuts in his cow pen. The cow with their split hoofs cleaned the hulls off. Then I put the walnuts on top of the house to let the rain wash them, and the sun seasoned them. I made over twenty dollars from nuts, grapes, and muscadines.

The first of November Mama and I counted our money in the jar. It was all in silver. We had thirty dollars. I taken ten dollars and got my rifle out of pawn. Mama was most happy her son had began to respond to the treat ment.

My troubles hadnt lessened any. I was being threatened by some of the colored men about dating their women and girls.

I had two fights with some of the sagers. One afternoon in the viledge—these were the Tick Bush sagers—one of them was the one had broken my collar bone three years ago. There were nine of them. They attacked me in front of Mr. Rosbouroughs store. They must have thought I was going to run like most of the colored boys. I picked up a a stick and started to flail them with it.

Mr. Rosbourough and Ambroster came out of the store, and Mr. Sam Winn, and stopped the fight. All the sagers quieted except the older Martin boy. He told them that he didnt like this nigger and he was going to beat hell out of him and it wasnt any of their business. I hadnt heard a sager talk to no aristicrat like this before.

Mr. Ambroster said to me: Do you want to fight him? I said: Yes, sir. Just keep the others back. He had trained me to box himself. He said to Mr. Rosbourough and Mr. Winn: Let them fight. Ely can whip all of them one at a time.

The fight was on. It didnt take long before Martin was bleeding from mouth and nose and one of his eyes was closed. Then his smaller brother taken it up. He was exactly my size. He was down on the ground quickly. Mr. Winn told them to get out of town, and not bother any more colored people.

This caused the sagers to attempt to revenge. That Friday night was a dance at the Odd Fellows Hall. These Tick Bush sagers came in the dark, close to a hundred yard with rifles, and shot at the dance hall. No one was injured. Many of the colored men had guns. They returned the fire. These sagers got on their mules and raced out of town. This was the only conflict I have known to happen between colored and white people.

I knew this was not the last of my trouble. I was much alone. I was becoming more bitter day by day to both Negro and poor white people.

Everything I had prayed for seem to come out right. The first of November I dropped all work and went into the mountains to trap and hunt. I soon felt like I was where I belong. I never felt alone in the mountains.

I had now a fine pack of English hounds. Father Tyson had gone to N.Y. for a while. I had fallen heir to his dogs that I wanted to use. This pack of dogs become to be the finest combination of dogs I have heard of.

They consist of this type of stratagy: Two cold-nose pot-lickor hounds to build up the trail. These English hounds were faster than the cold-nose. They take up the trail then. When it was hot enough, I send the three hush-mouth in. Two of them were crossed between pointer bird dog and bull terriar, and a shepperd.

These hush-mouths were faster than the English hounds. While Mr. Coon would be playing tricks topping trees, the hush-mouths would almost catch him on the ground. These hush-mouths would tree as much as a quarter of a mile ahead of the closest hound. This way we never lost a coon unless he made it to a cave. Day hunting, the bird-and-bulldog cross would point and retreave birds and tree squirrells. Put on a leash, they would track wild hogs. As the season opened, I found that almost every mountainere was now trapping and hunting for fur. The news of how much I had made last year had caused these people to try hunting. I was confined to just the two coves, Roark and Green View Cove. I trapped in one and hunted in the other. It didnt take long for this pack of dogs to clean up the game as I was hunting every night. I skinned everything that had hair from housecats to civet cats. By the first of December I had stripped these two canyons.

There wasnt but one other man that had good hunting dogs. His name was Mitchell. He was my friend. He had two sons. He lived beyond Two Mile Branch. I decided today I would go Mitchells and hunt with them tonight, leaving home at four oclock. It was foggy. I had to go near three miles. I went down the railroad close to Tick Bush. Before leaving the railroad, I would avoid much of the wet foliage.

As I crossed a small trestle, my dogs struck up a hot trail in a shed of woods about five hundred yards away. They were headed toward me. I made ready to shoot whatever it was as it cross the track. I was expecting it to be a fox. This trestle was very low, not more than four feet high. I knew there was a wet weather stream coming down this draw. The folliges was thick in the ravine.

As I was sitting on the trestle, two turkeys raced through the opening at the bottom of the trestle. There was no chance for a shot. The dogs came across the tracks with their noses in the air going to the mountain edge, where the turkeys would glide away down the canyon.

The dogs soon came back. This was the ghost I had heard about. I knew if I told what I saw I would be called a liar. Two days later I came back. The same performence started. I got down in the ditch. Mr. Gobler and two hens came so fast. I let both barrells of buckshot go. I got all three. Coming back on the track, here was four of these Tick Bush sagers passing. I told them of the way I discovered it was turkey. They resented my theory. Still claimed this place was haunted. This is the second ghost hunt. General Colmore got the gobler. Mr Judd got one hen. Doc Barton got the other.

My traps began to be robbed, some stolen. My dogs treed a coon in Shake Rag Hollow one night. Four men came to me, telling me their dogs had treed this coon and get away from here. Two of them had guns. I gave over to them, telling them not to try it again. I had a girl with me that had slipped out of her home just to be with me. This was why I didnt try to protect my own.

I went to Jack Prince, telling him about the sagers. He advised me to move my trapping to Tallys Fork. He said: You will find more skunks on the southwest of the range than on the north. This was when I learned that some animals would migrate to the afternoon sun. Skunks was one of them.

December fifteenth I shiped my first shipment to F.C. Taylor—two hundred and ten pelts. These were second grade pelts. They had become to be well furred. My check was seventy eight dollars.

I went at once to Dr. Lear. He said: I only need twenty five dollars of your money. Scott is mending rapidly. You can take your time to pay the other fifty dollars. He said: I think I will start chasing skunk. Nobody is making money like you.

He rubbed his nose, winked his eye at the nurse, and said: When you come back leave your pet skunk in the mountain. I knew what he meant. I beat it out, laughing to myself and feeling proud to know such a fine man like him. I thought of the night he came to Grandpas house to arrange a certificate for us to ship Grandpas corpse to Winchester. He stood by the coffin, patting Grandpa on the cheek, and said he was a grand old scout.

I told Mama I wanted to use this money to buy furs from the sagers that was trapping. She agreed. I told her that I dont want her to put her foot on the ground for the next three months, and she didnt. All she could do was piece quilts and cook.

Mr. Colmore ask me to come and help Miss Dora for two days, Christmas Day and Eve. Be sure to get rid of my skunks. Christmas Day was a open house to the students. I had to soak my hands in coal oil, and smoke them over smoking rags to get free of the skunk oder.

I brought all of my steel traps in for a week. Many had been stolen. Johnny McKay was on vacation. He wanted to hunt two days. I spent these days with him, shooting quail and rabbits, squirrells. This was the last days we hunted togather. I didnt envey him now as I did when be became to be a cadet. I now understand that a Negro was just to be of service. It was great to have aristocrats for your friends. I was lucky.

I had more presents given me this Xmas than ever. I had to go to almost every home of the aristocrats to collect presents. Mr. Colmore gave me a army overcoat like the kind that Genl. Grant wore—blue broadcloth with a cape—and a leather cap with earmuffs. He said that morning: Merry Xmas, Ely. Major Butt and I have made you a General instead of a cadet. This is General Grants coat. Put it on. It fitted perfect. He said: You can sleep anywhere and be warm. This was the greatest present I feel I ever recieved. It served such purpose the next three months.

The next morning Aunt Ada sent for me to come to see her. She need me. I knew her husband had been sick. I hadnt seen her for three months. She invited me in.

Doss was smiling at me and said: I am not mad with you. I dont blame you for trying to shoot me. Since I have been sick, I see things much different now. I will never be like I once were. I am through drinking. This blood poisining in my leg for two months has put me in bad shape. I need some money for medicine. I hear you are making money. You are a husseler. Mat is lucky to have a young man like you. I know you have a burden. I have a pistol I want to borrow ten dollars on until I get back to work. The Dr. claims I will be ready in a month. You see I dont get any treatment free like the people that work for the University. I work for the N.C. Railway.

He handed me a blue steel thirty two twenty Colt. He said: This is the latest gun made. I hadnt ever seen anything I wanted as this gun. It seemed to just fit my hands. I gave him ten dollars. He said: I am your friend in every way. I dont blame you for not letting these Negroes kick you round. I am back of you what ever happens.

When I looked at Aunt Ada tears were running down her cheeks as she was smiling. She only said: If Lena could see you now. I was so happy and full I wanted to get away. I said: I will bring you a rabbit soon. I left for home.

This gun was too fine. I must go and show it to Jack Prince. When I got to his house he had some of his old cronies visiting him. I was invited in. Mrs. Prince said: Ely, you are in time to have some of my blackberry wine and gingerbread. These four men was telling jokes and experiences. I became to know they were lawmen, as deputys like Jack. I sat and sipped the wine, waiting for a chance to tell Jack about the gun.

Jack came to his feet, said: Crocket, Sawer, Watkins—I have a little polecat here. He is the grandson of the grandest old polecat that ever lived in these mountains. I have been teaching him to shoot for four years. He dont know that he has graduated. I want you all to see who will be the finest rifle man and gunman ever been in the hills. Come out and see this boy shoot.

Then he said to me: I have been friends with these three men for twenty five years. It was hell in these mountains with fueding moonshiners. Revenue men didnt last long. When it was too touchy for them, we four taken it over. One of them live close to Sand Mountain, the other near Tracy City, next at the head of Battle Creek.

They all went to the barn. On the side was a horizontal line four feet long, a perpendiciluar line that made a cross and a circle eight inches in diameter. Jack said: Ely was six months gaugeing the horozental, putting the bullet within three inches above or below, thirty feet away on the pull. Then I made the cross and circle. He has mastered that in three month with speed.

Watch, he said. Shoot, he said to me. I tried the new gun. I placed five out of six in the circle to his counting. Jack said to them: Can you beat that? Crocket said: I pity the one that faces him. Watkin said: It is too bad that he isnt a white man. He would make a hell of a law man. Jack said: Thats what he wants to be. He has read every magazine of Nick Carter for the last five years. I have a lot of fun with him. My boy and he are close pals. I said to Jack: Keep my gun. I am going to Tallys Fork tomorrow. Ill stop by when I get back.

Mama was most happy when I told her that Uncle Doss and I had become to be friends again. While eating supper, I told Mama what my next plans were. Scott was up and had supper with us. I could see Mama was most happy to have him on his feet.

She said to me: Son, why dont you go to the concert tonight? You havent gone out to anything for four months. They are going to have some swell doing tonight. I wish you would go. And dont have no fight. Dont pay attintion to what these niggers say. You are their betters.

I knew this would be my last chance for the next three months. I dressed my best, even though I did smell like a polecat just now. Uncle Calvin Childress put on a concert twice a year. He was our organist at the chapel. He was a born musician. He couldnt read a single note of music. He played and directed by ear. Ten years ago he had a band, the first band Sewanee had. He still had many of the instriment in his care. He had tried to build another band. We boys just wasnt interested in music.

The school house was packed. Many students attended from S.M.A., and Father Stoneys friends at St Lukes.

I had heard that a young lady was visiting here from St. Charles, Kentucky. I hadnt seen her. She was a vocalist and educated. She open the concert, singing “My Country Tis of Thee.” I thought she was the prettiest little brown doll I had seen. She had tons of personality. As she pranced across the stage asking the audience to sing with her, she inspired everybody, even the students. They applauded her back.

As she came back, she said: I will sing to you and this gentleman, pointing, my heart loving song. I was sitting in the first row. She sang “Sweet Nellie Blond,” demonstrating her emotions to me as she sang. I had fallen in love for the first time.

The concert was a great success. After the concert there was a dance. The students left. We pushed the benches around the wall. Here was the strangest orchersty I ever heard of: Houston and Simon Smith and Arlandus Rankin played autoharps, and blew harmonocus that was held by a brace on their shoulders. Uncle Calvin blew the cornet. His daughter beat the drums. This was Sewanees music. We danced by it.

This beautiful girl was stormed by all the men and older boys. I stood back alone as usal, looking on. They were trying to get her to dance. She, I could see, was trying to get clear of them. She came to me and ask: Do you dance? I said: Yes. She said: Please take me in your arms. We glided over the floor to the tune of a waltz. She ask would I escort her home. I promised I would.

The boys were saying: He stinks like a polecat. She ask: Why dont they like you? Then she said: I know why—you are just dam goodlooking. I want you all to myself. She was doing the talking, because I didnt know how to talk romance. She refused to dance with any one else.

I now began for the first time to feel important. I went to all the older people and girls asking them to have a treat on me. They sold ice cream and pop, five cents a order. I had forty dollars. Half of it was one dollar bills. I held it in my hand to show I had money to what I please. I knew this was more money than any of the young guys ever had. Everyone I ask accepted. I could see this put everybody to thinking the little bastard isnt too bad to have around.

My little sweetheart sensed the meaning quickly. She sang as we danced. She said: We have stole the show. Lets go home. I want to be alone with you.

We talked, knowing we both were desperate in love with each other. We made our vows, thinking there was nothing to blot our happiness, to find a few days later, our familys protested our love affair. There had been a feud between our familys from far back. We decided we would carry on reguardless. As she said: We will live in sin if we have to. I wont give you up for no one. We then planned to meet in secret, as often as three times a week. She often slipped away and go hunting at night. This lasted for two months, when she had to go away.

The next day after the concert, I went to Tallys Fork to look it over. I stood on Natural Bridge Rock looking over this large canyon, as it was shaped like a two prong fork, each cove from two to three miles long. Around the rims was rugged and clifty. Down in the chasm was several hundred acres of cane brake.

I saw smoke from a cabin down at the base of the mountain. I headed for it. I wanted to meet some of the mountaineers. I had heard that there were a Negro lived over here, named Alf Cannon. I had seen him in the village. He was always with some sagers. No Negros in Sewanee knew him. Grandpa had spoke of him once.

When I got to the cabin I saw two of the cutest little brown dolls about my age. The house was a tipical log house with a ball through the center. These girls stood looking at me, dressed just alike in gingham. I spoke, saying: Hello. They didnt speak. I ask if Alf Cannon live here. They just stood and looked at me. A woman appeared in the door, dressed like the girls. She ask: What do you want? I ask could I speak to Mr. Cannon. She went back into the house. Out come Cannon, asking: What do you want with me? I explained that I were going to do some trapping over here. Can you tell me about what game is in here? He said: Wild cats, coons and polecats.

I ask him if he would hunt with me some. He said: No, I dont want no company, and dont come here bothering me and my family. He called his daughters in and shut his door. As I turned to leave, he opened the door and said: If you see hogs in the cane brake dont go in. They are wild, and slammed the door. This was the first and last talk I had with Alf Cannon. I met him many times on the trails. He wouldnt speak. They were most clean people you wish to see.

I soon found there were lots of skunk dens, and they were big ones. There were lots of foxes and coon tracks, hog tracks everywhere. Working out the canyons I got turned around in the cane brake, and came out on the oppisite side. It was three miles back across the canyon.

As I looked around I saw smoke three hundred yards away soaring over the trees. I knew someone lived there. Why did Cannon lie, claiming no one lived near here? I went to the house. There was a small white boy playing in the yard. I call. Hello. A woman came to the door dressed like all of the mountain woman in a Mother Hubbard dress, her hair dropping down her back.

She wanted to know what I wanted. I ask was the man of the house at home. She said: Nope. He will be here soon. Wont you come in? I went to the house. I told her I was lost. I want to know if there was a way to Sewanee without crossing the canyon. She said: Wait untill my husband comes. It wont be long. Its dinner time.

Just then I heard someone driving a ox team corning. She said: There comes my oldest son. He drove up with a load of wood. The little boy had been jabbering away asking about my dogs. The boy driving the oxes was darker than I, by two shades. He looked like a Indian.

The little white boy said to me. That is my half brother. His name is Andy. His farther is a black man. He lives down in the canyon. Andy said: Hello. I said the same.

Mr. Atkins came riding in on a blaze face black mare. He said hello as he got off his horse, asking: Who are you? I told him I was Ned Greens grandson. I want to ask about what kind of game is here in the canyon as I am going to trap. The wife came to the door, saying: Come in. Dinner is ready. He said: Come with us to dinner. The old gal has backbones, tatoes, cabbage sprouts, cracklin bread and blackberry cobler.

He said: Any of old Neds family is good with me. I know you must be hungry. Its a long walk to Sewanee. We went in to the table. He was a goodlooking man to be a mountainere, a heavy black head of hair, that come low on his forehead, well built with broad shoulders.

At the table Andy sat on one side by me. The little boy was seven years old. The blessing was like every man for himself. I was so shocked over the white woman having a nigger baby, and a white man raising him, I couldnt talk for thinking and trying to listen. Little John kept jabbering. No one talked except Mr. Atkins and John. Andy just sat looking down at his plate. I knew he was like me: a man without a country. I was surprised to hear Mr. Atkins say: Andy is my adopted son. His father is name Alf Cannon, a black man who lives down the canyon. He is my closest neibor. The wife only spoke when she ask if you would have more food. Atkins told me all about the canyon and invited me to come and hunt with him and Andy.

He said: We will have a wild hog run any time. He said: You know, Old Ned has a claim on the wild hogs he never used. You can now. Then I told him I owned one of Wat Cannons dogs. His name is Shep. He slammed his hand down on the table, saying: You own him? He is the smartest wild hog dog I have ever known. Come here and stay all night any time. We will have fun.

He ask could I shoot. I told him I had graduated under Jack Prince, both rifle and pistol. He said: You and Jack are friends. Nuf sed. Ill try you out when we are through eating. I ask did he think I would have trouble with anyone resenting me trapping. He said: If you do, come to me. He said: Some times the Tick Bushers come in hunting hogs. They are a dirty lot. Those Newbys and Skinners are a mean lot. If you run into them, dont even talk to them. They are always looking for trouble. I didnt talk of my troubles with them.

When we were outside he tried my rifle, hitting everything he shot at. A tree lark settled on the rail fence close to fifty yards away. He ask: Are you good enough to get that bird? When I shot the bird tumbled to the ground. He slapped me on the back and said: Jack has really trained you. Thats dam good. He walked with me for a quarter of a mile to show me a trail to Sewanee that would save fully a mile. These people become to be the best friends I had in the mountains. Andy and I become to be close friends as we trapped and hunted for the next three months.

On the way home I thought of what Grandpa had told me, not to talk about what I learned around the mountaineres. I was still puzzeled over Andys mama being a white woman, and why Alf Cannon being so selfish, I knew I haden better not talk of this to nobody. No Negro know about Andy.

It all came clear now what Grandpa meant the day we talked about Wat Cannon. Alf Cannon is the nigger that they defended. This is why he keeps himself away from other Negros. I knew I would learn more about this in time. This I would seal my lips on, not talk it to no one.

When I got home I had to take a repermanding from Mama. The gossipers had been to see her, telling her how I had squandered money last night showing out before this new girl. I said: I spent a dollar and thirty cents the entire night. Mama said: That could feed us for a week. She demanded my pistol, telling me not to see the girl any more. Tonight was the first time I refused to obey her. I ask her not to deny me of my guns. I am not going to be without them, so please dont ask me to. I said: I dont care what the niggers say about me any more. They are going to respect me from now on. Mama slapped me across the mouth, saying: Shut up. I went to my room and to bed. That was the end of it.

I left the next morning at five oclock with twenty steel traps on my back. I headed for the Atkins home.

Andy went with me into the canyon. He told me about some people that done hunting farther down the low lands near Sherwood. This was four miles from here. I wanted to see if I couldnt buy their furs at a profit.

It was strange to think he knew every mountainere between his home and Sherwood, not one person in Sewanee. He hadnt ever been in Sewanee. I made a deal with him to run my traps on Sunday. I would give him half of the catch. I couldnt do this and be back for Sunday School. I hadnt missed but once in three years.

Two days later I had installed twenty deadfalls, some honey holes and snares. Andy knew every trail in each fork on two small canyons farther west that had no names. He and I made a trip five miles down the lowlands toward Sherwood. He was liked by everybody. Seemed no one treated him like he was a Negro.

We went to five homes. I collected seventy pelts: foxes, skunks, coons, no possums, at the cost of fourteen dollars. Many of the pelts were skinned wrong, split and not cased. I showed these boys how to case the pelts, and said I would be back in three weeks.

Everything was in my favor. Trapping was good for skunks. In ten days I caught thirty pelts. I lost all the coons in the cane brake on the stream where the coon roved. A coon in a trap had no defense against a wild hog. All I would find was just the coons leg in the trap. Wild hogs go out to find food at dawn like all wild animals. They would beat me to the traps. I gave up the coons. I didnt care to fatten hogs on coons. My dogs would take care of them.

All of the skunks were of a large breed, and all most black. Half of them were appraised extra large. This caused the narrow stripe value to be one dollar and a quarter, the shorts two dollars, the blacks up to three dollars. Ten foxes was all I caught, three dollars apiece. I caught over a hundrd and fifty skunks out of this canyon in three months.

Andy and I were in the mountains every hour I was around. He was always a bit of curiosity to me. He never spoke, unless I ask him somthing, or unless he saw an animal. He would yell: Hoo wee. He didnt care to shoot. He rather tell me to shoot it.

One morning we met Alf Cannon on the trail. He passed us, didnt speak. I spoke to him. He didnt speak at all. I ask Andy didnt he and his father speak. He shook his head and quicken his steps to get away from me. I never mention his farther agan. I knew he realized he was without a country.

Mrs. and John Atkins were the kindest people I have ever known. They made me welcome at all times. John Atkins almost went wild over this pack of dogs. I had to hunt with him once every week. When he discovered that Shep was said to be the smartest hog dog in the mountains, he planned we would do some wild hog hunting.

He said: There is a boar in the canyon that everybody had tried to get him. He will weigh four hundred pounds. I know Shep will track him down. That dog knows how to get him out of the cave when we find him. You, Andy and I will get that devil. I have seen that dog work.

He said: I have seen this hog. He is a mustang. His ears have been frozen off. He has no marks. He is anybodys hog that gets him. I want him. Many people has tried for five years. He gets away. They call him the devil. He has killed several dogs because they didnt know how to take of themselves. He wont fool that old shepperd dog.

It was the third week in January, just after a heavy snow. John said: The snow is melting. Bring your dog tommorrow. We will get that devil hog. Tracking will be easy. This was my first hog hunt. It was eight when I arrived at his house. There were two young men name Russels there that lived down the canyon. They were here to join the hunt. At the edge of the cane brake, John found the big foot tracks. He said: You will see what a smart dog you own. He tied a rope around Sheps neck, holding the rope like a leash. Shep began to switch his tail and moved along sniffing his nose. Soon he was on the right trail.

We covered at least a mile meandering. the side of the mountain, stopping at a rocky ravine, where there was a cave about eight feet wide, three feet high. Shep stood whining and wagging his tail. John said: He is in there. I didnt know this cave was here. He taken the rope off of Shep, and said: Shep will bring him out. Ive seen him do it. You send him in. He told us all to get on a boulder.

I told Shep to go get him. He went in the cave wagging his tail. Soon he let out some barks. We could hear the hogs snorting. Shep came out running for his life, the hogs after him. There were at least ten. The big boer was in front.

Shep and the boer went down the mountain. The other hogs went around the ledge. This was a break for us. The hoer had separated himself from the other hogs. This saved us of much trouble and danger.

When Shep got to a level place he began circling with the boer right after him. After a couple of circles the boer stopt, just turning to keep his eyes on Shep. Then Shep stopt and walked to the boer. As he would rush at Shep and snarl at him, Shep would leap aside and repeat the same action over agan. I said: John, I am going to shoot him before he hurts my dog. John said: No, let Shep work him so as to take the pertness out of him. He wont want to run. When he is tired we will urge him close to the road, then kill him.

Just at that moment the boar charged at Shep, running him into a patch of snow. Shep slipped flat on his stomach. The hog rushed on him, slashing at him too high. Shep didnt come to his feet as the boer expected. He rolled away; keeping close on the ground. The boer snared so hard, caused him to spin around. Shep came to his feet, starting agan antagonizing the hoer. John Atkins yelled: Did you see that dog? How he outsmarted that hog? I tell you that is the smartest dog ever in these mountains. I leaped off my boulder, telling John: I am going to kill that hoer now. He wont kill my dog. As I approached him he started to run down the mountain. John yelled: Dont let him get away.

He raced to the bottom of the canyon, through the canebreak, up the other side over the fork to the other canyon, Shep and I within fifty yards of him. As we crossed the trail of Natural Bridge John Cooksey had to leap out of the trail to keep the boer from running over him. I knew he was looking for moonshine and not hogs. He yell somthing at me. I was running too fast with my rifle over my head to hear what he said.

The hog headed up the canyon toward the Two Mile Branch waterfall. There he got boxed in. The zero weather a few days before had frozen huge ice sickles that blocked the passages under the first waterfall. The ledge also was covered with ice. He skidded and lost his footing, falling off twenty feet down on the ice below. Landing on his back he was parilized. He couldnt get to his feet again. As I started down to shoot him I heard a voice from the other side of the canyon, saying: Dont touch that hog, nigger. That is our hog. What in the hell are you doing over here? You dont have no claim on hogs. We are going to take that one. There were six of them, four with dog on leashes. The other two had rifles. They were a part of the Tick Bush gang.

I thought of what Jack had told me—that they kill me as quick as they would a mad dog. I dropped behind a boulder, and tole them not to raise his gun if he wanted to live. They had started to raise their guns to their shoulders when Newsom, one of them, said: Skinner, that nigger can really shoot. They brought their guns down as Andy had caught up with me. He wanted to know what the argument was. I told him: They want to take the hog. He said: John will be here in a minute. He will tell em off.

Soon John and Russell came. Andy told John what was up. The gang had gone to the hog and had shot it. John he angry. He said: Ely, give me your gun. I said: No, they started to shoot me. I am not taking no chances. He said: I dont need no gun. I let them know who runs this canyon.

He went to them. There was a argument. John knocked one of them down. The others backed away and went up the mountain. They yelled back at me, saying: Nigger, we are going to kill you and all your dam dogs.

We went to the hog. He was a whopper. He look to be six feet long. John Atkins was excited over this catch. He weighed fully four hundred pounds. There were many storys of this boer. He had killed over a dozen wild hog dogs, and challenged men.

I only taken his tusks that was three inches long and as sharp as a blade. We four using a pole through his feet tied together tuggled him a quarter of mile to the top of Natural Bridge. John and Andy went to get the team and wagon, asking Russell and I to stay with the hog untill they came back.

Russell wanted to know why those fellows didnt like me. I explained that I am a Negro, and I hunted in their area. They just dont like Negroes. He said: Andys farther is a black man, pointing at Alf Cannon’s house down the canyon. He said: Everybody likes Andy. This was my opportunity to find the answer I wanted to know. I ask: How come Alf Cannon not to be lynched when it was discovered he had been dealing with a white woman? This is forbidden in the South, I am told.

He said: I was a small boy when Andy was born. Nobody talked about it after the first month he was born. When Andy was born, they discovered he was a black baby. It started a hell of a stink. My Pa told us boys about it. There was a lot of men from Sherwood came here to hang Alf. But the three Cannon brothers turned these fellows back, threatening to kill anybody that touched Alf.

In the time of slavery the Cannons had a small plantation down in the lowlands. They once owned most of these canyons. After the slaves were freed the six they owned never left them. Alf is one of the sons. He grew up with the three young Cannons. He was just like one in the family. Andy’s mother was hired to work for the Cannons. This is how she and Alf got to be close.

She told the mobbers that she done what she did for money. She just got caught, and dont harm Alf. It was her fault. He didnt rape her. Those Cannons were a tough sort. They made them scram.

All of people here joined with the Cannons. Everybody honored her for being honest. Alf went somewhere and got him a black woman. The Cannons gave him that farm. He has raised a family. Everybody in this canyon likes Alf. He dont have no black people friends. Five year later John Atkins married Andys mother. John has raised Andy and have a son of his own. He and Alf Cannon are friends. John would kill anybody that bothered Andy.

Then he said: You know Sewanee has their own way of law for their black people. I have been told that the uppish white people there thinks more of the black people than they do of the poor white people. The say they dont call you people niggers like they do in other places in the South world. This was some of the cause of the mob to quiet down.

He then said: We are not suppose to talk about this. I have told you because you are like one of us. Dont talk of it agan to no one. It is our business. There are just two kind of people here. That is a man and a woman.

I sat for several minutes looking down at the smoke from Alf Cannons chimny. I couldnt hardly believe what my ears had heard, thinking Alf Cannon was the luckiest Negro in the South.

Today was the twentieth of January, 1912. I had killed the largest game of my hunting, and had heard the strangest story of truth that could be told of the South. I envyed Andy. He didnt have no Negros around to call him a bastard.

Shep and I had built a repertation. As much as twice a week we helpt some of the people run down hogs. He was the only dog that would go in the caves and bring them out. I was glad to do it for them, because this canyon was the only place in the South I have ever felt free. I had planned to build a cabin the next year. Shep and I was credited of not loosing a bog if once on his trail. The fifteenth of March I bid the canyon and all of my friends goodbye, not thinking I wouldnt ever see them again. I had made more money than I had ever dreamed of.

I now reveal the activity in Sewanee in the past three months. There was a lot of entertainment given for the Negros such as cakewalks and festivals. I had gone to four with my sweetheart, having money to spend, wearing tailor-made clothes—the only boy that sported new clothes.

The secret had leaked out about my foster brothers ailment. It was the town talk of how I had made money enough to pay such a Dr. bill. My stock had rose with the girls and older people, but not with the boys and younger boys.

I had hunted nearly every night. I would rest three hours on return from my traps. I had an area of about seven miles to hunt. There were four coves. I would hunt each one night a week. There was a cove named Thump and Dick. I gave up this cove. It was rugged and heavey folidiged. I was so frightened one night that I never cared to hunt it again. All hunters held some fear of this canyon. There were many destressing storys told about this place.

I had explored this canyon twice in daytime. There were many small caves. There were many animal tracks that I just couldnt be sure they were dogs or huge cats, wild goats, wild hogs. It was narrow and deep and had a good stream. No one lived within two miles of it. There were no trails though it, just around the rim.

I had gone down the first bench of the mountian. I heard a woman scream not far away. At least I thought it was a woman. I yelled as to answer. The scream came again. This time it was across the canyon. Soon the hounds struck a hot trail, and either bayed or treed on the other side of the canyon.

I started across through the thick laurel bushes. I had gone fifty yards when a fight started, and then everything went silent. The next I realized all of my dogs were around me with their tails between their legs, whining. This was the most weird moment for me I ever experienced. The most struggle of it all was stumbling over my dogs as they hovered around me. This was the only experience that I dont have a sound answer to.

Speaking of experience, the mountaineres had many home remedies. This one may sound rare that I participated in—taking the fat of a skunk, and rendering the fat to oil. They gave it to children as a remedy for croupe, and whooping cough. Also it was supposed to be good for rhumatics. This I will agree. Because I had held the rifle in my right hand so much, this year rheumatism had affected my indext finger and thumb. Every morning it would be so stiff I would hope to catch a skunk. Before I would finish skinning it my finger would be supple. I rendered many pounds of skunk fat, traded it to the mountaineres for furs.

This caused me, regaurdless of my incompatents, I analized the skunk. I found he lived mostly on insects like bees, yellow jackets, various herbs as well as meat. I arrived at this decision—he could be called a bit of a pharmacy animal. I was having many of the girls to slip out at night and go hunting with me. No one talked about the skunk oder.

My little brother had been sent away to school. This had stopped me from having Negro fights. My troubles with the sagers had lessened because most of the young ones wanted to sell me their furs when they got any.

I ran into trouble with the Tick Bush gang at Two Mile Branch on Washintons Birtheday. Jessie, my girl friend, had slipped out to hunt with me. The dogs had treed. We thought it was a coon. I told her to hold my rifle while I hook up my carbide light.

I heard the click of the hammer of my rifle as she said: Dont point that gun at him. Drop it. I came to my feet to see there were four men. One had a shot gun. Skinner let his gun down, staring at her. Newsom said: Thats our game. Our dogs treed it. I ask her to give me the gun. She refused, saying: I can shoot, and will. Let them have the coon. No coon is worth trouble.

If ever I surrendered to anything that hurt, this was it. I put my lantern out. We went into the undergrowth fifty yards away, and waited for them to get the animal out, so my dogs would come to us. It was a house cat. I heard them cursing it as they shot it.

This was the first time I knew she knew about a gun. As she told me, she had been a tomboy with her three brothers. She hunted and fished with them.

Then she said: You are the man I want. I love everything you do. We are going to get married, and we will be the finest colored couple Sewanee ever had. These mountains are a part of you. I love them too. I want to become to be the school teacher here. You will be my first student. We hunt and have fun.

Here we made plans for our wedding to take place the second Sunday in May when the colored advacates of the hard-shell foot-washing Babtists goes to Beans Creek for a big foot washing. This was close to her home, the town Pelham. We had planned to surprise everybody. She was leaving the first of March. Tonight she persuaded me not to hunt alone any more. Pay someone to go with me.

Troubles seem to start again from this night. The next day Henry Prince stopt me and said I should stop carrying money on me to buy furs. Take a check book. There is some talk of robbing you. It means they will ambush you.

Two days later I got a letter from Meridian, Mississippi, from a little nurse I had dated last summer, saying I was the farther of her expected baby. Send for her. I had to marry her, she said. This grew to be a increasing program by the first of April. I went to my old men friends for advice. I didnt know what to do with this kind of trouble. They all giggled and made fun of it, saying: What a man! Hugh Hill said: Let the gals worry about it. It wasnt that easy for me. This was a burden I had to carry alone.

On the first of March the Gibsons sent word to me to come down to their house to get some furs. This was at the foot of the Winchester road. I went from my run to their house. They had twelve dollars worth.

Coming back at Popular Springs a wild turkey crossed ahead of me. I ran after it, trying to get a shot. I came on a saddle. It was a find. I hadnt seen anyone with one like it except Mr. Rosbourough. I carried it home. It was much weather beaten. I cleaned it up with saddle soap and hung it on the front porch, hoping someone would claim it.

Many people came to see it but for a month no one claimed it. Uncle Rufus Mosley offered ten dollars for it. I sold it to him with the understanding that if the owner should come for it, I would refund his money.

I takened my girl friends advice to get someone to hunt with me, because in Greens View Cove I found a paper tied on bushes, reading: Nigger, stay out of the mountains. I couldnt find no colored boys that wanted to hunt. The second of March Will Roe who lived next two door to us, had three hogs he was to kill. One of them jumped the fence and ran into the woods. He had hired my cousin John Will Green, a young fellow, to help him. I had been to Jack Princes. I saw them chasing the hog. I caught up with them. I could see they would never catch him.

I told Will: I will shoot him. That is your bet. He said: Alright, if you can with a pistol. I got within thirty feet, got a good aim at his head. It was a good shot. John Will came to me, saying: Ill hunt with you if you will teach me to shoot like that. I said: Thats a deal. Ill teach you all I can.

For the next two weeks every day he went with me. All he wanted to do was shoot the pistol at every tree he passed. I soon found he wanted to be a big bully. He was arogant and full of hate. I couldnt see why. He was very dark. His mother and farther worshiped him. He was twenty years old. They hadnt lived here more than a year. He didnt care for women. He liked to try to gamble. This had caused him to get beat up a couple of times. We confided to each other our greivences and revenges.

I was surprised when he told me of Negros had planned to rob me and I missed their plans. This, of course, made me feel closer to him. By time of two weeks we had agreed we would be as close as two people could be. We would stick togather no matter what. Of course, I didnt know too much about him. I did know I needed someone for a friend.

The season is over for trapping and hunting. As I sized up my condition it was like this. Scott, my foster brother, was now the picture of health. He had started to work. All bills are paid. I had cleared on buying and catching furs, gathering nuts, herbs, selling wood close to four hundred dollars since September. I had bought Mama a coat suit, and two pair of shoes—fifteen dollars. I had two new suits, three pair of new shoes, shirts, soxs. This was my first time to wear B.V.O.s. I have fifty dollars in the bank. Mama have twenty dollars. I have their guns and the watchs I am holding for six dollars each.

Everything is fine except this baby trouble. Thought that was bad enough, but when it increased here at home. Hugh Hill gave a party the first week in April. I taken John Will with me. No one seem to like him. I just taken him along. He tried to drink all of the whiskey there. He got drunk. I didnt know he had stolen my gun before we left home. Uncle Bill Smith was Billy Cheathams stepfarther. John Will had been beat up by Billy. He decided to shoot Uncle Bill for no reason. I knocked the gun up as it went off. He was soon helpless drunk. When we got him home Uncle John Will, Senior, acused me of teaching his son to be a desporado. He said since he had been around me all he talked about was killing people. Dont ever come to his house. I was born for no good. This really sunk in. I said from that minute dam all Negros, relitives, and sagers. I become to be as evil as a person could feel. Here I decided I dont want no friends. Ill fight my own battles by myself.

I taken my job back at the Colmores. This ten dollars sure was slow pay, as I had made faster money. The morning after the Titanic sunk Miss Dora Colmore told me about Major Butt going down with it. All of Sewanee was in mourning.

This day I went to Farther Eastern and told him about my troubles, asking him what should I do. I am accused four ways. I am threatened to be prosecuted. The other has threaten to shoot me if I dont marry his daughter, explaining I dont believe it to be true. Father said: Wait untill these children are born. Thats the only way to know.

Neither one of the familys wanted to listen to this. This is when I told Mama. She layed me low with her tongue. I felt more freindless than ever. She didnt simpithize no way, although she didnt want me to marry anyone. By this time I didnt talk to no one. I was ready to fight anybody. I felt ashamed to think I had created a bastard to suffer like I have.

I was expecting the men to come back for the saddle. I had told Jack Prince about it. He said they were lying. They never had enough money to buy one like that. Come to him if they did come. I said: I will unless they come with guns again. If so I will meet them with a gun and I am not waiting to be shot first. I want to kill all of them.

Jack said: I think you had better let me take your guns or get that idea out of your mind. Henry, Jacks son, said: Dads right, Ely. Fighting wont do. I agreed I was wrong. Jack said: They have to come by here. If they come I will be there. I felt good to think I had someone my friend.

I wanted to go to Magby, but he didnt like me, although he hadnt bothered me about me shooting at McFarling. He knew all the high-up white people all favored me. He would have to go to both my concilmans before he could arrest me. I paid Henry for the three loads he had delivered me and went home.

The next night I taken my hounds over to Shake Rag Hollow to let them have some exercise. There was a fox chase on. The fox came close to my dogs. They become excited and got in the chase. They had done this before. It always made these mountainers angry because the English hound were so fast they would put a grey fox in a hole within an hour.

Two days later, I was sawing wood when five of the Tick Bushers rode up to my gate. Three of them had rifles. I thought they were coming for the saddle. Hell seemed to surge through. All I wanted was for sombody to start anything. I wasnt going to yield to nothing.

One of them got off his horse and came in the gate. He said: We came here to look at your dogs teeth. They got on our fox run the other night. We found three of our sheep killed yesterday. Your dogs was in our district. We want to see if your dogs have sheep wool in their teeth. I said: If that is what you want to do go and look for yourself. My rifle was sitting behind the tree close to me.

He went to the dogs pen and opened the gate. White and Laura, my two breed dog and trained dog, went to him. He looked in the mouths and came out, went to his mule, untied his rifle, and came back in the gate.

I ask: What are you going to do with that gun? He said: I am going to kill the dogs. They got sheep wool in their teeth. I stepped forward with my rifle at hip action, saying: The first man shoots a dog, I shoot him. Drop that rifle. He did.

Just here Jack Prince rode up. He listen for a minute to what I was saying, as I told them: It is not your job to kill other peoples dogs. You go and get Magby the constable.

Then Jack ask them: Whats going on? One of them said: You are in time to see a nigger killed. Jack said: Dont try anything, if you dont want to die. Hes not bluffing. He shoot all three of you before you get a gun up to shoot. He is quick as lightning with a rifle. You go like he ask, and get Magby.

They wasnt gone long before they were back. The three with guns came back with Magby. Jack came in the yard, and sat between the two piles of wood. He said: I want to be here when they come back. He said: I saw them as they passed my house. I had to sadle up before I could start. I thought they were headed here. I dont blame you for not letting them destroy your fine dogs. They are just begruging. All they do is make trouble.

As they rode up, Magby was with three of them, the ones that had guns. Magby dismounted and open the gate. I walked to the porch which placed me direct in front of them. Magby said: Boy, are you crazy? Dont you know better than to threaten people with a gun? I am going to examine those dogs. If they have wool in their teeth I will shoot. Thats the law.

I spoke then, saying: Mr. Magby, you can examine my dogs, but you wont kill no dog of mine. Any man kill a dog of mine I kill him, because the law is the dog must be gotton ridd of. Each of the dogs are petigreed and regersterd at the Mississippi Kennels. They are English walker hounds valued from twenty five to seventy five dollars a dog. I would return them back to the kennels.

He said: Do you respect what I repersent? I said: No, not when you are going to destroy my property of value. I mean to protect every dam thing I own, law or no law. One of the riders said: I going to kill that nigger. He started to lift his rifle from the saddle. I yelled at him not to raise that gun. Magby shouted at me: Dont point that gun at me. Put it down. I said: Do you think I am going to let those suns of bitches shoot me? He looked back at them and shook his head.

I didnt know Mama had come out of the house and on the porch back of me, untill Magby said to her: Mat, the white people gave you that boy to raise. Is this the way you raised him not to have any respect for white people or law? At that moment Mama reached over my shoulder and snatched my rifle, slamming the stock down on the bannister, breaking it, and said: Pull your shirt off. I am going to give you the licking of your life.

No one had noticed Jack sitting by the wood pile. As I was pulling my shirt over my head, I heard Jack shout: Dont one of you raise a gun. I mean dont attempt to shoot that boy.

Mama taken the hitch rein to my halter, a one inch sea grass rope. It had wire wrapped ends that held the ravel. She slashed me at least twenty lashes. Every lash brought blood that ran to my heels. I know she didnt know the effect untill it was over.

She said to Magby: Now you can see that I didnt raise him to be impertinant to you white people. That statement drove me into a tantrum. I started to curseing them, calling all kinds sons of bitches, telling them that as soon as I could get another gun I would kill them. Jumping up and down swearing I would never stop untill I kill you. I dont want to live if I have crawl to you poor white sager suns of bitches.

Jack said to Magby: Take these men away, now. I know Jack and Magby hadnt spoken in five years. Magby got on his old black mare. They rode away. I went to Jack and thanked him for saving my life. He said to Mama: You almost got the boy killed. Wet a towel and wipe the blood off his back. I am going to take Ely with me. I cant leave him here with no protection.

We left. Jack said: I want to talk to your consleman. I said: We will go to Farther Eastern. He said: They will be back. Since Magby favored them he had no right to bring them with him. He was just going to stand there and let them shoot you. He dont like you. I am going to report this to the officials of Sewanee.

At Fathers house we went in. Jack explained why he was here with me. After he had finished talking Father ask me how did I feel about it. I told him all I wanted to do was kill all of them as soon as I get a rifle. Nothing Father said could change my mind. I repeated this time after time.

Then he said: Dont talk. I want to think awhile. He stood looking out the window for a few minutes. When he spoke, he said: My son, I think this can be a solution to all of your problems. Go away for a while—at least six months. You are most bitter. And leave today. Do you have money? I said: Yes. Sixty dollars. He said: Write me, so I can have a Father to look after you. I told him I would.

I saw at once Father was right. A little time could play a great part in my problems. Then he said: I give you this advice. Do refrain from being so determined. Be brave enough to be patient. This I never forgot. It was to me the most wonderful blessing I ever received. That was the last time I saw Father Eastern.

I went to Mother Richinsons home where Aunt Ada worked. Jack had advised me to remain in the corporation. Because he said: Those sagers might come back since Magby had favored them. When you ready to leave, I will put you on the train.

When I got to Aunt Adas, Uncle Doss was home. The rain that morning had caused him to come home. I told them of what had happened, asking Uncle Doss to go and get my clothes, writing what I wanted him to bring. He didnt return untill nine oclock that night. He explained that many riders had passed our house untill eight oclock. Magby came and talk to Mama, telling her not to talk to no colored people about your trouble, as not any of them knew about it.

I am going to take you to Cowan myself. There is a work car at top of Poplar Spring Canyon. Its a heavy one. I think we can get it on the track. The grade starts down there. It will skate down to Cowan. We will leave here at two oclock. No one will be stirring at that hour. We can skirt the town. Go through the S.M.A. campus. Then head for the railroad. He said: Get some sleep. You will need it.

I found myself feeling close to him for the first time.

He said: I wish some of them would try to stop us. I brought your pistol with me. I would like to put a blaze under them sagers. I knew how he hated a sager. I had lost all the desire to fight after recieving the blessing from Father Eastern. I couldnt sleep for thinking of about how the outer world would be.

Also I regretted Uncle John Will had said I would come to a no good end. I hope John Will Jr. will change his mind about wanting to kill people. But little did I think he would be the first colored person to go to the prison from Sewanee, and within four years he would kill two men and be killed also.

Before we left Aunt Ada said: I am glad to see you go. I have for the last two years worried about you. I have expected to hear of you having trouble, or shooting some­ body. I have wished that you hadnt ever seen a gun. Uncle Doss said: If it hadnt been that he is as good a shot as he is, he wouldnt be living.

As I stood there, I began to feel lonely for the first time since I had talked to my mother at the waterfall five years ago. It seemed I was being stripped of invisible clothing and my soul was bare to the world. I suppose all people feel that way when leaveing a world they loved like I loved Sewanee and the mountains.

I had always believed that this ten thousand acres represented the greatness of God. It wasnt long before it was definitely comfirmed that my feeling and thoughts of Sewanee were true. I didnt know at this time the greatness of Sewanee would be my guide on the life journey walking the third path of tradition.

On our way to the railroad we didnt meet a person. In the way I told Uncle Doss that I could go by myself. We had a hard time getting the heavy cart on the rails. I looked back at Uncle Doss, knowing he had hept me get started away. He was as glad to see me go as any one. The cart moved very slow untill I passed the home of the Sisters of St. Mary, then the grade dropped. I hated to leave these mountains I knew so well. I knew they were a part of me. Would I ever see them again? I loved every foot of this beautiful area. I was praying some too.

When I realized it, the cart was increasing speed every second. I became worried how could I stay on this flat car going around the curves at this rate of speed. I almost lost my suitcase when it slid away from me. Holding on with one hand I just barely caught the hand-grip with two fingers to hold it long enough for the cart to straiten, sending it back against me, almost pushing me off the cart.

I could see that I had a strait strip of road for a distance. I knew there was no getting off of this cart untill I was at the end of this track. All at once I knew my life was facing a gamble if I made it. I knew the surges would come from each side. I quickly placed my suitcase in the center of the cart, then lay across it, hooking toes to the side of the cart, holding the other with hands.

Soon I was in the bends of the road. It was a struggle to hold on. The cart was flying. I didnt see how it could stay on the track. This lasted for about ten minutes, which seemed like an eternity to me. Trying to look ahead of me it was hard to breathe. I hadnt ever rode this fast even on the train. I cant say that I was scared. Really I didnt care too much about what could happen. I knew this—I am free and my own man. I said several times: I have got to make it.

All of a sudden I came out on a rim of the mountain. I saw Cowan below. I knew I had made it. There was one more trying curve almost like a horse-shoe bend. This one I had to hold on with my toes. I was tired. I relaxed for a few moments. When I passed over the tunnel of the N. and C. main line I tightened my grip to the cart again. The surge was on stronger than ever. I managed to last it through.

Then the road gradualy came down paralell the main line track for a mile. The cart was still traveling at a high rate of speed. I knew I had to stop it some way or jump off before reaching the switch. I had on heavy-sole shoes. I chanced falling off by sitting on the edge so as to press my foot against the wheel as a brake. This checked the cart effectively untill my foot was burning painfully. The cart stopped about fifty yards from the switch.

I tried to get the cart off the track. I couldnt. I knew there wouldnt be a train along untill seven oclock in the morning. I left it and walked to the station, wondering why did Uncle Doss put me on a cart with a brake on it. He was a railroad man and knew this road like a book. Did he mean to kill me this way? I wont ever know because I wont ever see him again. I am alive.

My foot was paining when I reached the station. No one except the ticket agent was in the station. When I walked in I looked at the clock on the wall. It read three twenty five. I had come this eight miles in twenty minutes on a flat cart, down the winding road of the mountains. I sat down in the sitting room for a few minutes to think. All I could think of was that the mountains had taken care me untill now.

Just then the adgent was much like most of the poor class of white people. He poked his head in the window and said: Where did you come from this time of morning? I said: What time will the next train be coming through to Nashville? He said: Cannon Ball will be here in the next thirty minutes. If she is on time she will stop. If she is late she wont.

I went to the window, and ask him to give me a ticket to Waxahachie, Texas. I want to catch this next train. He said: Nigger, are you running from trouble? What have you done? How did you get here this time of morning? I havent heard a sound of a horses foot. You must have walked a distance.

I ask again: Will you sell me a ticket? He hesitated a moment, then said: Yes, thats my job. You are just a boy. I could be wrong. But every time I have sold a ticket to Texas this time of morning, they comes looking for them.

I went in the toilet room and changed clothes. My shoe I had used to brake with the sole was burned badly. The shoe was no good. All I had like shoes was a pair of dancing pumps. I put them on as I dreseed in a blue surge suit, boxed back, peg tops pants a soft white flannel, white bat with a purple band, like the Sewanee student wore.

When I ask for my ticket, I ask the adgent how long would it be before the train arrive. He looked at me and said: She will be here in the next two minutes. I will try to stop her. Then he said: You are a Sewanee nigger. I can tell the way they dress. They all are high collard and proud, just like them dam white people up there on that mountain. They dont have no use for a poor white man, and I dont have any use for them.

He said: I have signaled for her to stop. Get out there because she will barely stop. You might have to swing on. The train allmost passed the station before stopping. I caught the last coach with the help of the porter taking my suitcase from me as I kept up with the moving train. I swung on.

This was the first time I had seen a Pullman coach. This was one that I had entered. The porter looked at my ticket and said: Follow me. You go to the day coach. We had to go through many Pullmans before we reached a chair car. The porter said: You are a Sewanee boy. I said: Yes. I know them when I see them. No one wears a hat like that except them. I have had the teams many times. He placed my suitcase in the rack and said: This is your chair. I sat down. He went to the next coach.

I looked round me. Everybody was white. No colored anywhere. I knew this porter had made a mistake in thinking that I was a white school boy, evedently a cadet.

I didnt have any intension of making my identity known just now. I pulled my hat down as tight as I could on my head to keep my sandy curly hair from showing too much. No one would descover that I am a Negro. In the morning, I would go to the colored coach.

I laid back in the chair and began to review the nights events. How everything in the world had changed within the last three days. How fast I had moved about in two hours. So many times I had heard the whispers coming from somewhere, saying: Out there, out there. I am out there. I know I am going to see, hear, and do things I never knew of. There in Texas I wont be called bastard, Clabber or nigger, like that sager ticket agent at Cowan called me.

I thought of what a Negro said in Alabama—that a Southern sager could smell Negro blood in a person no matter how white he was. I remember how quick that agent discovered I was a Negro the moment I walked into the sitting room. This porter, a Negro himself, dont know I am a Negro.

I had heard Ann say that when you are traveling act as in Rome. She traveled two days in a white coach. No one knew the diffirence, I finally decided that I didnt ask to be here. I had obeyed the porter. I am not trying to pass for white. All they will do is tell me to go to the Negro car.

I began to think of every friend I had left in Sewanee. I began to wonder what I will do to make a living in Texas. I will miss Mr. Colmore, Mr. Rosbourough, Jack Prince, and Johnny McKay. I didnt tell them goodbye. These friends had been much of a part in my life.

Scott, Mamas oldest son, was improving with his health. He will soon go to work on the Saint Agustus project. I will send her money when I make some. She can sell my guns, my fine dogs. As I looked out the window, I could see the dawn was aproaching. This was a sacrad hour to me when in the mountains. This was the last time I held any thought of my life I had left behind me. The porter came through and said: Nashville in fifteen minute.
